GUIDELINES AND ST ANDARDS
Recommendations for the Evaluation of Left
Ventricular Diastolic Function by
Echocardiography and for Heart Failure With
Preserved Ejection Fraction Diagnosis: An
Update From the American Society of
Echocardiography
Sherif F. Nagueh, MD, FASE (Chair), Danita Y. Sanborn, MD, FASE (Co-Chair), Jae K. Oh, MD, FASE,
Bonita Anderson, MApplSc, DMU, ACS, FASE, FASA, Kristen Billick, BS, ACS, RCS, RDCS, FASE,
Genevieve Derumeaux, MD, PhD, Allan Klein, MD, FASE, Konstantinos Koulogiannis, MD, FASE,
Carol Mitchell, PhD, ACS, RDMS, RDCS, RVT, RT(R), FASE, Amil Shah, MD, Kavita Sharma, MD,
Otto A. Smiseth, MD, PhD, Honorary FASE, and Teresa S. M. Tsang, MD, FASE, Houston and Dallas, Texas;
Boston, Massachusetts; Rochester, Minnesota; Brisbane, Australia; San Diego, California; Creteil, France; Cleveland,
Ohio; Morristown, New Jersey; Madison, Wisconsin; Baltimore, Maryland; Oslo, Norway; and Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada
Echocardiographic assessment of left ventricular (LV) diastolic function is an integral part of the routine eval-
uation of patients presenting with symptoms of dyspnea or clinical concerns for heart failure. Given the pres-
ence of diastolic dysfunction in many cardiovascular diseases, clinical reports should include comments ondiastolic function and/or left atrial (LA) pressure whenever possible. Since the publication of the 2016 ASE/
EACVI guidelines for assessment of LV diastolic function, new data on additional echocardiographic variables
as left atrial strain and their association with LV ﬁlling pressures have emerged. Moreover, prognostic data
From the Methodist DeBakey Heart and Vascular Center, Houston Methodist
Hospital, Houston, Texas (S.F.N.); Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,Massachusetts (D.Y.S.); the Mayo Clinic, Department of Cardiovascular
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota (J.K.O.); Cardiac Sciences Unit, The Prince
Charles Hospital, Brisbane, QLD, Australia and Faculty of Health, School ofClinical Sciences, Medical Radiation Sciences, Queensland University ofTechnology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia (B.A.); the Scripps Clinic and Scripps La
Jolla Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, California (K.B.); IMRB, Facult /C19e de Sant /C19ed e
Creteil, Creteil, France (G.D.); the Section of Cardiovascular Imaging, Departmentof Cardiovascular Medicine, Heart, Vascular and Thoracic Institute, ClevelandClinic, Cleveland, Ohio (A.K.); the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine
Morristown Medical Center, Gagnon Cardiovascular Institute, Morristown Medical
Center, Morristown, New Jersey (K.K.); Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and PublicHealth, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin (C.M.); the Division
of Cardiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
(A.S.); the Division of Cardiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,Baltimore, Maryland (K.S.); the Institute for Surgical Research, Division of
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Diseases, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet
and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway (O.A.S.); and the Division of Cardiology,University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada (T.S.M.T.).
The following authors reported no actual or potential conﬂicts of interest in relation
to this document: Bonita Anderson, MApplSc, DMU, ACS, FASE, FASA, Genevieve
Derumeaux, MD, PhD, Sherif F. Nagueh, MD, FASE, Danita Y. Sanborn, MD, FASE,Amil M. Shah, MD, MPH, and Teresa S. M. Tsang, MD, FRCPC, FACC, FASE.
The following authors reported relationships with one or more commercial inter-
ests: Kristen Billick, BS, ACS, RCS, RDCS, FASE, is a clinical specialist at Lantheus
Medical Imaging; speaker at Bristol Myers-Squibb; member at Large ASE Board of
Directors, the Cardiovascular Credentialing International Advisory Board, and theCardiovascular Credentialing International Advanced Cardiac Sonographer Exam
Writing Committee; and a Co-Chair ASE Nominations Committee, CCI Advisory
Board, CCI Advanced Cardiac Sonographer (ACS) Exam Writing Committee, Trea-surer for the San Diego Society of Echo. Allan Klein, MD, FASE, is President-Electfor the National Board of Echocardiography; has received research grants from and
is a scientiﬁc advisory board member for Kiniksa; has received research grantsfrom and is a scientiﬁc advisory board member for Cardiol Therapeutics; Research
grant and scientiﬁc advisory board at Ventyx; has served on research grants andthe scientiﬁc advisory board at Pﬁzer; has received book royalties from Wolters
Kluwer, and Elsevier. Konstantinos Koulogiannis, MD, FASE, is a consultant for Ab-
bott and the Edwards Lifesciences Mitral Advisory Board. Carol Mitchell, PhD,ACS, RDMS, RDCS, RVT, RT(R), FASE, is a member of the following professionalsocieties: the American Society of Radiologic Technologists, the American Institute
of Ultrasound in Medicine, the Society for Vascular Ultrasound, and the Society of
Diagnostic Medical Sonography; is an author of textbook chapters for Elsevier; andhas received W. L. Gore & Associates contracted research grants to the Universityof Wisconsin-Madison. Jae K. Oh, MD, FASE, FACC, FAHA, FESC: UpToDate
Section Editor for Pericarditis, Anumana for potential royalty from AI ECG
Diastolic Function Algorithm, REDNVIA for research grant in EVOID AS trial, andMedtronic for consulting in valvular heart disease projects. Kavita Sharma, MD,Department of Cardiovascular Medicine Morristown Medical Center. Otto A. Smi-
seth, MD, PhD, Honorary FASE: co-inventor of ‘‘Method for myocardial segment
work analysis’’, co-inventor of ‘‘ Estimation of blood pressure in the heart’’ and
has received one speaker honorarium from GE Healthcare. Teresa S. M. Tsang,
MD, FRCPC, FACC, FASE: Executive board member of Canadian Society of Echo-
cardiography
Attention ASE Members:
Login at www.ASELearningHub.org to earn CME credit through an online ac-
tivity related to this article. Certiﬁcates are available for immediate accessupon successful completion of the activity and postwork. This activity is free
for ASE Members, and $40 for nonmembers.
Reprint requests: Sherif F. Nagueh, MD, FASE, Methodist DeBakey Heart and
Vascular Center, Houston Methodist Hospital, 6565 Fannin Street, Houston,TX 77030 (E-mail: snagueh@houstonmethodist.org ).
0894-7317/$36.00
Copyright 2025 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the American Society of
Echocardiography.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.echo.2025.03.011
537
from epidemiologic studies have demonstrated the association of echocardiographic measures with the
subsequent development of heart failure. This update provides a contemporary approach for the assessmentof LV diastolic function and the estimation of LA pressure in the general population of patients in sinus rhythm
referred for echocardiographic evaluation, and in special populations that require deviation from the general
approach. The update also discusses the application of echocardiography in the diagnosis of patients withheart failure with preserved LV ejection fraction. (J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2025;38:537-69.)
Keywords: Diastole, Echocardiography, Doppler, Heart failure
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Introduction 538
Clinical and T echnical Considerations 539
2. Invasive Assessment of L V Diastolic Function 539
3. Normal Ranges for Diastolic Measurements 540
4. Reference Ranges Compared With Prognostic Values for Diastolic
Function Measurements 551
5. Age-Independent Indices of Elevated L V Filling Pressures 552
6. L V Structure and LA Volume and Function 552
7. L V Global Longitudinal Strain 552
8. LA Strain 552
9. Other Imaging Modalities for Assessment of LV Diastolic
Function 552
10. Deﬁnition of L V Diastolic Dysfunction Using Echocardiography 552
11. Algorithm for Estimation of Mean LAP at Rest 553
Supplemental Parameters 554
12. Reporting on Diastolic Function 55513. Diastolic Exercise Echocardiography 555
A. Indications 555
B. Performance 555
C. Interpretation 556
14. Application of AI to the Assessment of L V Diastolic Function 55615. Assessment of L V Diastolic Function and Estimation of L V Filling Pres-
sures in Special Populations 556
A. Assessment of L V Diastolic Function in Patients With Valvular HeartDisease 557
B. Heart Transplant Recipients 559
C. Pulmonary Hypertension 560D. AV Block, Bundle Branch Block, and Electronic Pacing 560E. Restrictive Cardiomyopathy 561
F. Pericardial Constriction 561
G. HCM 562H. Atrial Fibrillation 563
16. HFpEF Diagnosis 563
A. Clinical Diagnosis of HFpEF 563
B. Echocardiographic Imaging 565C. Natriuretic Peptides 565
D. Role of HFpEF Prediction Scores 565
E. Alternative Diagnoses 566F. Exercise and Invasive Hemodynamic T esting 566G. Research Needs 566
Notice and Disclaimer 566
Reviewers 566Supplementary Data 567
1. INTRODUCTION
Echocardiographic assessment of
left ventricular (L V) diastolicfunc-tion is an integral part of theAbbreviations
2D= Two-dimensional
AI= Artiﬁcial intelligenceAR= Aortic regurgitation
AS= Aortic stenosis
ASE = American Society of
Echocardiography
AV= Atrioventricular
CMR = Cardiac magnetic
resonance
CRT = Cardiac
resynchronization therapy
CT= Computed tomography
CW = Continuous-wave
EF= Ejection fraction
ESC = European Society of
Cardiology
GLS = Global longitudinal
strain
HCM = Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
HF= Heart failure
HFpEF = Heart failure with
preserved left ventricular
ejection fraction
IVRT = Isovolumic relaxation
time
LA= Left atrial
LAP = Left atrial pressure
LARS = Left atrial reservoir
strain
LAV = LA volume
LAVi = Left atrial volume
index
LBBB = Left bundle branch
block
LV= Left ventricular
LVEDP = Left ventricular
end-diastolic pressure
LVEF = Left ventricular
ejection fractionroutine evaluation ofpatients pre-
senting with symptoms of dys-pnea or clinical concerns forheart failure (HF). Given the pres-
ence of diastolic dysfunction in
many cardiovascular diseases,clinical reports should include
comments on diastolic function
and/or L V ﬁlling pressures when-ever possible. The 2016
American Society of
Echocardiography (ASE) andEuropean Association of
Cardiovascular Imaging guide-
lines for diastolic function assess-ment sought to simplify theclinical approach
1and have
been shown to have good accu-
racy in a large multicenter study.2
Incomplete data, conﬂicting pa-
rameters, and/or uncertainty
about inclusion and exclusioncriteria still result in an unaccept-
ably high frequency of unclassiﬁ-
able or indeterminate caseswhen using the 2016 guidelinesalgorithm. New data on addi-
tional echocardiographic vari-
ables (e.g., left atrial [LA] strain)and their associations with L V
ﬁlling pressures have emerged.
3
Moreover, prognostic data from
epidemiologic studies have
demonstrated the association of
echocardiographic measureswith the subsequent develop-
ment of HF.
4Therefore, this up-
date has two primary goals: (1)to provide a more contemporaryapproach for the assessment of
L V diastolic function and the esti-
mation of L V ﬁlling pressures and(2) to discuss the application of
echocardiography in patients
with HF with preserved L V ejec-tion fraction (HFpEF). As this
guideline serves as an update to538 Nagueh et al
Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
the 2016 diastolic function guide-
line document, it is important tonote that there are several imagesin the original guideline that
show important pathologic or
abnormal echocardiographicﬁndings that are not republished
in this documentbutmay be of in-
terest to readers of this update.The document has three main
sections: one for the general pop-
ulation, a second for speciﬁc pop-ulations that require deviationfrom the general approach, and
a third focused on the diagnosis
of HFpEF. The document alsocontains a summary and recom-
mendations for artiﬁcial intelli-
gence (AI) applications in thisﬁeld.
Clinical and Technical
Considerations
The application of the guidelines
starts with clinical data, including
age, heart rate, underlyingrhythm, blood pressure, two-
dimensional (2D) and Doppler
echocardiographic ﬁndings withrespect to L V volumes and wall
thickness, ejection fraction (EF),
LA volumes, and presence and severity of mitral valve disease. Theguidelines are based on scientiﬁc work concerning diastolic functionand L V ﬁlling pressure in adults studied in ambulatory and acute hospital
caresettings and thusshould not be applied inchildren,normalpregnant
women, or in intraoperative settings. The quality of the 2D, Doppler,and speckle-tracking echocardiographic (STE) signals as well as the lim-
itations for each parameter should be carefully scrutinized. If a signal is
suboptimal, it should not be used in formulating conclusions about L Vdiastolic function. Thepresence of a single measurement thatfalls within
the normal range for a given age group does not necessarily indicate
normal diastolic function and conclusions should not be based on a sin-gle measurement. In an individual patient, consistency among thedifferent indices is of great importance. For the most successful analysis
of diastolic function in any given case, the echocardiographer should
have a solid understanding of the physiologic rationale behind each var-iable, the situations that make any given variable less reliable, the proper
acquisition technique, and the correct analysis of the echocardiographic
variables.2. INVASIVE ASSESSMENT OF LV DIASTOLIC FUNCTION
The invasive assessment of L V diastolic function relies on the estima-
tion of two fundamental parameters, the time constant of L V relaxa-
tion and the chamber stiffness constant. These determine L V pressure
throughout diastole. The time constant of L V relaxation, t, during the
isovolumic relaxation period (isovolumic relaxation time [IVRT]) can
be estimated from high-ﬁdelity solid-state manometry of the left
ventricle. The resulting time-pressure data can then be analyzed to es-timate t(abnormally prolonged >48 ms). The more common ones
include monoexponential decay model to zero asymptote, where
P(t)= Po e
/C0t/t(Supplemental Figure 1 ), or to nonzero asymptote,
where P(t)= Po e/C0t/t+PN, where Pois the L V pressure at peak
/C0dP/dt.5Note that tis load dependent. The sensitivity of L V relaxa-
tion to changes in afterload is most apparent in patients with systolicL V dysfunction. The relation between tand L Vend-systolic pressure is
steeper in patients with systolic dysfunction than in hearts with
normal L V systolic function
6,7
Chamber stiffness affects the rate of L V pressure increase during L V
ﬁlling. Chamber stiffness is most reliably obtained by analyzing L V
end-diastolic volume and L Vend-diastolic pressure (L VEDP) obtained
from conductance catheters from multiple cardiac cycles as ﬁlling isdecreased by gradually inﬂating a balloon in the inferior vena cava.
It is determined primarily by the stiffness properties of the sarcomeres,
the interstitial space, and L V chamber geometry and wall thickness. Itcan be characterized by the L V chamber stiffness constant k.Table 1
presents a summary of invasive measurements that indicate abnormal
L V diastolic function.
5,7,8
The term L V ﬁlling pressures is frequently used but can refer to
several different L V and LA diastolic pressures. These pressures
include mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP), meanMAC = Mitral annular
calciﬁcation
MR = Mitral regurgitation
NP= Natriuretic peptide
PA= Pulmonary artery
PADP = PA diastolic pressure
PASP = Pulmonary artery
systolic pressure
PCWP = Pulmonary capillary
wedge pressure
PR= Pulmonary regurgitation
RAP = Right atrial pressure
RV= Right ventricular
SRIVR= Strain rate during the
isovolumic relaxation period
STE = Speckle-tracking
echocardiographic
TDI = tissue Doppler imaging
TEER = Transcatheter edge-
to-edge repair
TR= Tricuspid regurgitation
TTR = Transthyretin
Key Points
1. The guidelines should not be applied to children, normal preg-
nant women, or the intraoperative setting.
2. The quality of the 2D echocardiographic images, Doppler
waveforms, and STE signals as well as the limitations foreach parameter should be carefully assessed.
3. The echocardiographic indices of diastolic function should al-
ways be interpreted in the context of clinical status and otherechocardiographic parameters.4. The echocardiographer should have a solid understanding of
the physiologic rationale behind each variable, the situations
that make any given variable less reliable, and the technical as-pects of acquisition and analysis of the variables.
Table 1 Invasive measurement values that diagnose LV
diastolic dysfunction and HFpEF5,8
Parameter Value
1. Time constant of LV relaxation ( t), ms >48
2. LV chamber stiffness constant >0.015 *
3. Rest mean PCWP, mm Hg >15
4. Rest LV end-diastolic pressure, mm Hg >16
5. Exercise mean PCWP, mm Hg $25
6. Exercise LV end-diastolic pressure, mm Hg $23
7. PCWP/Cardiac Output slope during supine exercise,
mm Hg/L/min>2
*Value based on the 90th percentile of control group without HFpEF,
where pressure and volume data were obtained by conductance cath-
eter, from Kasner M, Westermann D, Steendijk P, et al. Utility ofDoppler echocardiography and tissue Doppler imaging in the estima-
tion of diastolic function in heart failure with normal ejection fraction: a
comparative Doppler-conductance catheterization study. Circulation.2007;116:637-647.Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7
Nagueh et al 539
LA pressure (LAP), L V pre-A pressure, mean L V diastolic pressure,
and L VEDP1(Figure 1 ). In the early stages of diastolic dysfunction,
L VEDP is the only abnormally elevated pressure, while meanPCWP and LAP remain normal. During tachycardia and/or increased
L V afterload or intravascular volume, mean PCWP and LAP increase,
which is the basis for diastolic stress testing (invasive and noninvasive).Some Doppler variables correlate with an increase in L VEDP,
whereas others reﬂect an increase in mean LAP or its surrogate
(Table 2 ).
Tables 3 and4summarize the technical aspects, hemodynamic
determinants, and clinical utility including advantages and limitationsof each parameter used in the echocardiographic evaluation of L Vdiastolic function.3. NORMAL RANGES FOR DIASTOLIC MEASUREMENTS
Numerous studies have demonstrated the association between age
and echocardiographic measurements of L V diastolic function (a listof these studies is included in the Supplemental Appendix ). Some
studies have further suggested that prognostic thresholds for dia-
stolic measurements may differ by age. The purpose of this sectionis to describe current estimates of normal ranges of diastolic mea-
surements by age, on the basis of the observed range of values
among subjects believed to be free of cardiovascular disease andwithout known risk factors. Importantly, such normal ranges arenot necessarily equivalent to ‘‘optimal’’ values, as the aging process
itself may affect diastolic function. However, the use of age-speciﬁc
normal ranges can enhance clinical interpretation of diastolic indicesand has become standard for echocardiographic measurements of
cardiac structure and function.Key Points
1. L V impaired relaxation is deﬁned as a time constant of L Vrelax-
ation >48 ms.
2. Increased L V chamber stiffness is deﬁned by a chamber stiff-
ness constant >0.015.
3. Invasive criteria for HFpEF, in addition to the time constants of
L V relaxation and L V chamber stiffness, include mean PCWPat rest > 15 mm Hg, L VEDP at rest > 16 mm Hg, and meanPCWP with exercise $25 mm Hg.
4. Doppler measurements that correlate better with mean LAP
or PCWP include mitral E velocity, E/A ratio, and E/e
0ratio.
5. Echocardiographic measurements that correlate better with
L VEDP include mitral A velocity, pulmonary vein Ar velocity,the time difference between Ar duration and that of mitral Aduration (Ar /C0A), and LA pump strain.
6. Throughout this document, the term L V ﬁlling pressure refers to
mean LAP or its correlates (mean PCWP, L V pre-A pressure). Itshould be noted that L VEDP and LAP are not the same, and
although elevated LAP is always associated with elevated
L VEDP in patients with diastolic dysfunction, elevated L VEDPmay be present when LAP is normal.
Figure 1 (Left) LV diastolic pressure recording. Arrows point to LV minimal pressure (min), LV rapid ﬁlling wave (RFW), LV pre-A pres-
sure (pre-A), A-wave rise with atrial contraction, and end-diastolic pressure (EDP). (Middle) LA pressure recording showing ‘‘V’’ and
‘‘A’’ waves marked along with Y and X descent. (Right) Simultaneous LV pressure and LAP recording showing early and late trans-
mitral pressure gradients. Notice that LA ‘‘A-wave’’ pressure precedes the late diastolic rise (LV A wave) in LV pressure.Table 2 Echocardiographic correlates with mean PCWP and
with LVEDP
PCWP, mean LAP, LV pre-A, and
mean LV diastolic pressure
correlates LVEDP correlates
1. Mitral peak E velocity 1. Mitral peak A velocity at tips level
2. Mitral E/A ratio 2. A-wave duration at the annulus
3. Mitral E velocity
deceleration time3. Mitral A velocity (tips level)
deceleration time
4. Mitral E/e0ratio 4. Pulmonary vein peak Ar velocity
5. Pulmonary vein
systolic-to-diastolicvelocity ratio5. Pulmonary vein Ar
duration /C0mitral A duration
6. Peak TR velocity
and PASP6. LA minimum volume
7. End-diastolic velocity
of PR and PADP7. Tissue Doppler–derived mitral
annular a
0velocity
8. LARS 8. LA pump (or contractile) strain540 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
Table 3 Parameters required for the assessment of LV diastolic function via transthoracic echocardiography
Parameter/variable Acquisition Measurements
Primary measurements
Transmitral Inﬂow 1. Apical four-chamber 6color Doppler
imaging to aid optimal alignment.
2. PW Doppler sample volume (1-3 mm) placed
at MV leaﬂet tips.
3. Lower zero baseline and adjust velocity scale
so signal above the zero baseline is as largeas possible.
4. Use low wall ﬁlter setting (100-200 MHz) and
low signal gain.
5. Sweep speed at 100 mm/s.6. Optimal spectral waveforms should display
minimal spectral broadening and not display
spikes or feathering.
7. For A duration, when end of A-wave is not
well deﬁned, sample volume may be lowered
a few millimeters toward the mitral annulus.Peak E-wave velocity (cm/s) : peak early
diastolic modal velocity after ECG T wave
Deceleration time (ms) : time interval from
peak E-wave velocity along the
deceleration slope to the zero baseline
Peak A-wave velocity (cm/s) : peak late
diastolic modal velocity after ECG P wave
E/A ratio : peak E-wave velocity divided by
peak A-wave velocity
± A duration (ms) *: Time interval from the
onset to the offset of the A-wave signal at
zero baseline
TDI at mitral annulus 1. Apical four-chamber with TDI preset
(detection of low velocity, high amplitude
signals).
2. PW sample volume (5-10 mm) at septal and
lateral insertion site of the mitral leaﬂets(larger sample size required to ensure
sampling of annular excursion over systole
and diastole).
3. Angle of interrogation should be as parallel as
much as possible to annular motion.
4. Adjust zero baseline and velocity scale to
display the full spectral signal above andbelow the zero baseline as large as possible.
5. Sweep speed at 100 mm/s.
6. Optimal spectral waveforms should be sharp
and not display signal spikes, feathering orghosting.e0velocity (cm/s) : peak early diastolic
modal velocity after ECG T-wave
a0velocity (cm/s) : peak late diastolic modal
velocity after ECG P-wave
MV E/e0ratio : MV peak E-wave divided by
the TDI e0velocity
Average E/e0: MV peak E-wave divided by
the average of the TDI septal e0and lateral
e0velocities
(Continued )Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 541
LAVi (mL/m2) 1. Apical four- and two-chamber views.
2. Each view optimized for left atrium.
3. Avoid foreshortening by maximizing the
width of the LA base (mitral annulus) and by
maximizing the LA long axis. This typicallyrequires an anterior tilt, demonstrating thepulmonary veins entering the left atrium.
4. Acquire and freeze end-systolic frames (one
or two frames before MV opening).From each view, trace the LA area (excluding
the PVs and LAA) and measure the LAlength from the center of the MV annulus
to the center of the superior LA wall.
Ensure long-axis lengths are within 5 mm of
each other.
LAV (mL) : calculated via the method of disks
or area-length method.
LAVi (mL/m2): LAV divided by BSA.
Peak TR velocity (m/s) 1. Acquired from any view that aligns TR jet
parallel with the ultrasound beam as notedvia the color Doppler images.
2. CW Doppler cursor is aligned parallel to the
TR jet.
3. Adjust zero baseline and velocity scale to
ensure TR signal is displayed as large aspossible.
4. Optimize gain, compression and/or reject to
obtain a complete proﬁle with minimalspectral ‘‘bearding.’’
5. Sweep speed at 50-100 mm/s.Peak TR velocity (m/s) : averaged over the
respiratory cycle
542 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
PV inﬂow 1. Apical four-chamber with color Doppler
imaging at a reduced Nyquist limit to aidoptimal alignment and identiﬁcation of
venous ﬂow (anterior tilt may be required).
2. PW Doppler sample volume (3-5 mm) placed
approximately 5-10 mm into the right upperor right lower PV.
3. Use low wall ﬁlter setting (100-200 MHz) and
low signal gain.
4. Adjust zero baseline and velocity scale to
display the full spectral signal above and
below the zero baseline as large as possible.
5. Sweep speed at 100 mm/s.6. Optimal spectral waveforms should not
display spikes or feathering.
7. Note: High PRF may be required when peak
velocities exceed the Nyquist limit. In thisinstance, be aware of the second sample
volume position (if placed at the mitral valve
level, PV and MV signals will besuperimposed, and
PV S-wave and D-wave measurements will
not be accurate).Peak S-wave velocity (cm/s) : peak systolic
velocity at ECG T wave. When two systolicpeaks (S1 and S2), the peak S2 should be
measured for the S/D ratio
Peak D-wave velocity (cm/s) : peak early
diastolic velocity after ECG T wave
S/D ratio : peak S-wave velocity divided by
peak D-wave velocity
± Peak AR velocity (cm/s) *: peak late
diastolic velocity after ECG P wave
± AR duration (ms) *: Time interval from the
onset to the offset of the AR-wave signal atzero baseline
IVRT (ms) 1. Apical long-axis or ﬁve-chamber view.
2. CW Doppler through LVOT to simultaneously
display the end of aortic ejection and the
onset of transmitral inﬂow.
3. Use low wall ﬁlter setting (100-200 MHz) and
low signal gain.
4. Adjust zero baseline and velocity scale to
display the full spectral signal above andbelow the zero baseline as large as possible.
5. Sweep speed at 100 mm/s.
6. Optimal spectral waveforms should display
AV closing click and clear onset of transmitralinﬂow in early diastoleIVRT (ms) : measured as the time interval
between aortic valve closure and MV
opening.
(Continued )Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 543
LV GLS (%) 1. Optimize the apical four-chamber, two-
chamber, and long-axis of the left ventricle,avoiding foreshortening.
2. Increase 2D gains to increase speckles.3. Narrow image sector and decrease image
depth for optimal frame rate (40-80 frames/s). Ensure sector wide enough to include full
wall thickness and apex and depth to extend
beyond annulus to allow capture of entire leftventricle throughout the cardiac cycle.
4. Region of interest should include 90% of the
myocardium but not the pericardium/epicardium.
5. Conﬁrm good-quality electrocardiogram.
6. Acquire three to ﬁve cardiac cycles for each
view ensuring similar heart rates for eachview.LV GLS (%) : calculated using dedicated LV
strain software to track the LV endocardialwall and to calculate LV GLS. Ensure
correct ECG gating for end-systole based
on aortic valve closure. Conﬁrm trackingand adjust contour and region of interest ifneeded.
Secondary measurements
Valsalva maneuver†1. See above in primary measurements section
for transmitral ﬂow for the proper techniqueof acquiring transmitral inﬂow signals.
2. Patients should be instructed to bear down
against a closed glottis and practice thistechnique before recording.
3. Transmitral inﬂow signal should be
continuously recorded for 10 to 12 s during
the strain phase of the maneuver.
4. Use a slower sweep speed (50 mm/s or
slower) to display the transmitral signal at
rest and during peak strain and/or duringpeak strain and after release.
5. The acquired trace should be annotated to
indicate the use of the Valsalva maneuver.
6. An adequate Valsalva maneuver may be
deﬁned as a >10% reduction in maximal E-wave velocity from baseline.Valsalva positive: E/A ratio < 1 or increase
in A-wave velocity
Valsalva negative : E/A ratio > 1
Color M-mode Vp (cm/s)†1. Apical four-chamber with color Doppler
imaging of transmitral inﬂow (variance modeoff).
2. M-mode cursor placed well aligned with the
path of transmitral inﬂow.
3. Lower the color Nyquist limit by either
decreasing the color velocity scale or by
moving the color baseline upward in the
direction of MV inﬂow to enhance the earlydiastolic slope.Vp (cm/s) : measured from the level of the
mitral annulus to 4 cm into the LV cavityalong the early diastolic slope of ﬁrst
aliased velocity (red-blue interface)
544 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
TE-e0time interval (ms)†See above in the primary measurements section
for transmitral ﬂow for proper technique ofacquisition of transmitral E-wave and TDI e
0
velocities.TE(ms): time interval between the peak R
wave on ECG and the onset of transmitralE-wave velocity
Te0(ms): time interval between the peak R-
wave on ECG and the onset of TDI e0
velocity.
R-R intervals should be matched.
TE-e0(ms):Te0minus T E
Peak PR end-diastolic
velocity (m/s)1. Acquired from any view that aligns PR jet
parallel with the ultrasound beam as noted
via the color Doppler images.
2. CW Doppler cursor is aligned parallel to the
PR jet.
3. Adjust zero baseline and velocity scale to
ensure PR signal is displayed as large aspossible.
4. Optimize gain, compression and/or reject to
obtain a complete proﬁle with minimalspectral ‘‘bearding.’’
5. Sweep speed at 50-100 mm/s.Peak PR end-diastolic velocity (cm/s) :
measured at end-diastole
(Continued )Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 545
Advanced techniques
LA strain (%) 1. See above in the primary measurements
section for LA volumes for the proper
technique for optimizing apical four-chamber
and two-chamber dedicated LA views.
2. Decrease gain and compression to optimize
clean blood pool and LA tissue border,
minimizing artifact.
3. Narrow image sector for optimal frame rate
(50-70 frames/s, preferably on higher end).
4. Conﬁrm good quality ECG with a well-visible
P wave. Use R-R gating method to providereservoir, conduit, and contractile LA strainvalues.
5. Acquire three to ﬁve cardiac cycles for each
view ensuring similar heart rates for eachview.
6. Use dedicated LA strain software to track LA
wall in both apical views (excludingpulmonary veins and LAA).
7. Conﬁrm tracking is on the underside of each
annular point, following the tissue boundary
and extrapolating the fossa ovalis, LAA andPVs to the roof of the left atrium. Minimallyadjust contour if needed.LARS (%) : peak positive strain value during
ventricular systole.
LASct (%) : measured in sinus rhythm as
0 minus strain value at the onset of AC(pre-A wave on ECG), where 0 = strain
value at end-diastole (negative value).
LAScd (%) : 0 minus strain value at AC
(negative value).
Green dots, peak of the strain curve; red dots,
peak strain at onset of AC or at pre-A, S_R,
LARS; S_CT, LASct; S_CD, LAScd.
AC, Atrial contraction; AR, atrial reversal; BSA, body surface area; CD, LA conduit strain; ECG , electrocardiography; LARS =S_R, LA reservoir strain; LAScd =S_CD , LA conduit strain;
LASct =S_CT , LA contractile or pump strain; MV, mitral valve; PV, pulmonary vein; PW, pulsed-wave; Vp, early diastolic ﬂow propagation velocity.
*Additive value when suspected elevated LVEDP and normal LAP (e.g., grade 1 diastolic dysfunction with elevated LVEDP and normal LAP).
†May be attempted when pseudonormalization of the transmitral inﬂow proﬁle is suspected. The Valsalva maneuver may also be performed to identify reve rsible and irreversible grade 3
diastolic dysfunction.546 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
Table 4 Utility, advantages, and limitations of variables used to assess LV diastolic function
Variable Utility and physiologic background Advantages Limitations
Mitral E-wave
velocityReﬂects the LA-to-LV pressure gradient
during early diastole and is affected bychanges in the rate of LV relaxation andLAP.1. Feasible and reproducible.
2. In patients with DCM and reduced
LVEF, mitral velocities correlate betterwith LVFPs, functional class, and
prognosis than LVEF.1. In patients with CAD and patients with
HCM in whom LVEF is >50%,transmitral velocities correlate poorlywith LVFPs.
2. More challenging to apply in patients
with arrhythmias.
3. Preload dependent.
4. Age dependent (decreasing with age).
Mitral A-wave
velocityReﬂects the LA-to-LV pressure gradient
during late diastole (atrial contraction)and is affected by LV compliance and
LA contractile function.Feasible and reproducible. 1. Sinus tachycardia, ﬁrst-degree AV
block and paced rhythm can result infusion of the E and A velocities. If E at
onset of A is >20 cm/s, A velocity may
be higher than if diastole was longer.
2. Not applicable in AF/atrial ﬂutter.
3. Age dependent (increases with aging).
Mitral E/A ratio Along with the DT, this ratio may be used
to identify ﬁlling patterns: normal,impaired relaxation, PN, and restrictive
ﬁlling.1. Feasible and reproducible.
2. Increased ratio usually predicts
elevated LVFP in patients with
myocardial disease but is not useful in
normal subjects.
3. Provides diagnostic and prognostic
information.
4. In patients with DCM, LV ﬁlling pattern
correlates better with LVFPs,functional class, and prognosis than
LVEF.
5. A restrictive ﬁlling pattern in
combination with LA dilation inpatients with normal EFs is associated
with a poor prognosis similar to a
restrictive pattern in DCM.1. Preload-dependent. A normal
transmitral proﬁle may be difﬁcult todifferentiate from a PN transmitral
proﬁle, particularly with normal LVEF,
without additional variables.
2. When E velocity at onset of A is
>20 cm/s, E/A ratio will be reduced
(see above).
3. Not applicable in AF/atrial ﬂutter.4. Age dependent (decreases with
aging).
Mitral DT Inﬂuenced by the rate of decline in LA-LV
pressure gradient after mitral valve
opening, and therefore LV relaxationand LV stiffness.1. Feasible and reproducible.
2. A short DT (<140 ms) in patients with
reduced LVEFs indicates increasedLVEDP with high accuracy both insinus rhythm and in AF.1. Preload-dependent.
2. DT does not relate to LVEDP in normal
LVEFs.
3. Should not be measured with E and A
fusion or E at onset of A >20 cm/s
because of potential inaccuracy.
4. Age dependent (increases with aging).5. Not applicable in atrial ﬂutter.
Mitral A
durationReﬂection of LV compliance in late
diastole.
Shortening occurs when there is reduced
LV compliance resulting in a rise in LV
pressure with atrial contraction, which
abruptly terminates transmitral inﬂow.
Best used in conjunction with pulmonary
venous AR duration (see below).1. In patients with cardiac disease, a
longer A duration for age is usually
associated with normal LVFPs.
2. A shorter A duration (<120 ms) in
patients with cardiac disease
indicates elevated LVFPs.
3. When the ECG PR interval is normal,
termination of the A duration before
the peak ECG QRS complex is a
reliable indicator of elevated LVEDP.1. Cannot be reliably measured or used
when there is E and A fusion, sinus
arrhythmias, second- and third-degree AV block, or a short PR interval
(<120 ms).
Changes to
mitral inﬂow
proﬁle withValsalvamaneuverHelps distinguish normal from PN
transmitral patterns by reducing
preload. A decrease of E/A ratio of$50% or an increase in A-wave
velocity during the maneuver, not
caused by E and A fusion, are highly
speciﬁc for increased LVFPs.When performed adequately under
standardized conditions (keeping
40 mm Hg intrathoracic pressureconstant for 10 s) accuracy indiagnosing increased LVFPs is good.1. Not every patient can perform this
maneuver adequately. The patient
must generate and sustain a sufﬁcientincrease in intrathoracic pressure, andthe sample volume position needs to
be maintained at the mitral leaﬂet tips
during the maneuver.
2. It is difﬁcult to assess if it is not
standardized.
(Continued )Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 547
Table 4 (Continued )
Variable Utility and physiologic background Advantages Limitations
MV L-wave
velocityTriphasic transmitral inﬂow proﬁle with
mid-diastolic ﬂow indicates markedlydelayed LV relaxation in the setting of
elevated LVFPs and reﬂects a
continued LA-LV pressure gradientduring diastasis.
May also be seen on the TDI trace
between the e0and a0velocities.1. When present in patients with known
cardiac disease (e.g., LVH, HCM), it isspeciﬁc for elevated LVFPs. However,
its sensitivity is overall low.
2. Presence in AF may be associated
with increased LVFPs.May rarely be seen with normal LV
diastolic function when the subject hasbradycardia; however, when present,
the velocity is usually <40 cm/s.
TDI e
0velocity e0velocity is an index of LV relaxation.
The hemodynamic determinants of e0
velocity include LV relaxation, restoring
forces and ﬁlling pressure. e0is
decreased across all grades ofdiastolic dysfunction.1. Feasible and reproducible.
2. LVFPs have a minimal effect on e0in
the presence of impaired LV
relaxation.
3. Less load dependent than other
conventional PW Doppler parameters.
4. Helps distinguish PN from normal
transmitral inﬂow proﬁles.1. Limited accuracy in patients with CAD
and regional dysfunction in the
sampled segments, signiﬁcant MAC,
surgical mitral rings or prostheticmitral valves and pericardial disease.
2. Need to sample at least two sites with
precise location and adequate size of
sample volume.
3. Different cutoff values depending on
the sampling site.
4. Age dependent (decreases with
aging).
E/e0ratio e0velocity can be used to correct for the
effect increased preload on the
transmitral E velocity, E/e0ratio can be
used to predict increased LVFPs.1. Feasible and reproducible.
2. Values for average E/e0ratio < 8
usually indicate normal LVFPs, values>14 have high speciﬁcity for increasedLVFPs.1. Not accurate in patients with heavy
MAC, or prosthetic MV and pericardial
disease.
2. ‘‘Gray zone’’ of values (E/e0between 8
and 14) in which LVFPs are
indeterminate.
3. Accuracy is reduced in patients with
CAD and regional dysfunction at the
sampled segments.
4. Different cutoff values depending on
the sampling site.
LAVi LA volume reﬂects the cumulative effects
of increased LVFPs over time. It is
directly but weakly related to LVFP.Increased LA volume is an independentpredictor of death, HF, AF, and
ischemic stroke.1. Feasible and reproducible.
2. Provides diagnostic and prognostic
information about LV diastolicdysfunction and chronicity of disease.
3. Apical 4-chamber view provides visual
estimate of LA and RA size which
conﬁrms LA is enlarged.
4. A normal LA size suggests normal
LVFPs.1. LA dilatation, in the absence of
diastolic dysfunction, may be seen in
patients with high-output states, hearttransplants with biatrial technique,atrial ﬂutter/ﬁbrillation, signiﬁcant MV
disease, and in well-trained athletes.
2. Suboptimal image quality, including
LA foreshortening, in technically
challenging studies precludes
accurate tracings.
3. It can be difﬁcult to measure LA
volumes in patients with ascending
and descending aortic aneurysms and
large interatrial septal aneurysms.
TR velocity Can be used to estimate the PASP in the
absence of PS or RVOT obstruction
(RVSP = PASP). A signiﬁcant correlationexists between PASP and noninvasivelyderived LAP in group II PH. In the
absence of pulmonary disease,
increased PASP suggests elevated LAP.1. PASP is passively elevated when the
LAP is increased due to left heart PH;
thus, an elevated PASP infers anelevated LAP.
2. Increased PASP indicates PH which
has prognostic implications.1. Indirect estimate of LAP.
2. Adequate recording of a full envelope
is not always possible, though
intravenous agitated saline or UEAsincrease yield.
3. Accuracy of calculation of PASP is
dependent on the reliable estimation
of RAP.
4. With very severe TR and a low systolic
RV-RA pressure gradient, PASP
cannot be accurately estimated.
5. RVSP does not equal PASP when
there is PS or RVOT obstruction.
(Continued )548 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
Table 4 (Continued )
Variable Utility and physiologic background Advantages Limitations
PR end-
diastolicvelocityCan be used to estimate the PAEDP when
TR velocity cannot be accuratelymeasured. A signiﬁcant correlation
exists between PAEDP and invasively,
as well as noninvasively, derivedPCWP. In the absence of pulmonarydisease, the PAEDP approximates the
PCWP.1. PAEDP is closely related to PCWP.
2. Increased PAEDP indicates PH which
has prognostic implications.1. Adequate recording of a full PR jet
envelope is not always possiblethough UEAs increases yield.
2. Accuracy of calculation of PAEDP is
dependent on the reliable estimationof RAP.
3. PAEDP overestimates PCWP by
>5 mm Hg when there is increased
PVR.
Pulmonary
veins: S
velocity, Dvelocity andS/D ratioS-wave velocity (sum of S1 and S2) is
inﬂuenced by LAP, LA contractility and
relaxation, LA stiffness, and LV and RVcontractility. D-wave velocity isinﬂuenced by changes in LAP in early
diastole and LV relaxation and it
changes in parallel with the transmitralE-wave velocity. AR velocity isdetermined by LA contractility and LV
compliance.
Decrease in LV compliance and increase
in LAP is associated with decrease in S
velocity, increase in D velocity, and an
increase in AR velocity and a longer ARduration. The S/D is inversely related toLAP.1. Reduced S velocity, an S/D ratio <1
and systolic ﬁlling fraction (systolic
VTI/total forward ﬂow VTI) < 40%indicate increased LAP in patients withreduced LVEFs.
2. In patients with AF, DT of the D-
velocity can be used to estimate meanPCWP.
3. AR velocity > 35 cm/s indicates an
increased LVEDP.1. Feasibility of recording PV inﬂow can
be suboptimal, particularly in ICU
patients.
2. The relationship between PV systolic
ﬁlling fraction and LAP has limited
accuracy in patients with normal EF,
AF, MV disease, and HCM.
3. AR velocity is absent in patients
with AF.
Ar-A duration The time difference between durations of
PV ﬂow and transmitral inﬂow duringatrial contraction is associated with the
LVEDP. The longer the time difference,
the higher LVEDP.1. AR duration > mitral A duration by 30
ms indicates an increased LVEDP.
2. Independent of age and EF.
3. Accurate in patients with MR and
patients with HCM.1. Adequate recordings of AR duration
may not be feasible in many patients(comparing the end of AR and
transmitral A signals to the ECG QRS
may be helpful in identifying ashortening of the transmitral Aduration).
2. Not applicable in patients with atrial
arrhythmias, sinus tachycardia orheart block.
3. Transmitral A duration cannot be
reliably measured in certain cases (see
above).
IVRT Reﬂects the time interval aortic valve
closure and MV opening and the
crossover between LA and LVpressures.
Duration is directly related to LV
relaxation and inversely related to LAP
(i.e., prolonged in patients withimpaired LV relaxation and normalLVFPs, shortened with increased LAP).1. Overall feasible and reproducible.
2. IVRT can be combined with other
transmitral inﬂow parameters such asE/A ratio to estimate LVFPs in patientswith HFrEF.
3. Helpful in identifying elevated LVFPs in
patients with MAC.
4. When IVRT markedly prolonged (>110
ms), LAP likely normal.
5. A short IVRT (<70 ms) has a high
speciﬁcity for elevated LAP in patientswith cardiac disease.
6. In patients with MS or MR, IVRT can be
combined with T
E-e0to estimate
LVFPs.1. Limited use in isolation
2. Age-dependent (shorter in young
patients with rapid LV ﬁlling andlengthens as relaxation slows withage)
3. Preload-dependent (normalizes with
increasing LAP)
4. IVRT is in part affected by heart rate
and arterial pressure.
5. More challenging to measure and
interpret with tachycardia.
6. Identiﬁcation of the onset of MV
opening can be challenging.
(Continued )Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7
Nagueh et al 549
Table 4 (Continued )
Variable Utility and physiologic background Advantages Limitations
LV GLS Measure of LV systolic function. Impaired
LV GLS is common in some patientswith HFpEF indicating subclinical LV
dysfunction.1. A more sensitive index of myocardial
systolic performance than EF.
2. Provides earlier detection of
myocardial disease in the setting of a
normal EF.
3. Can be more reproducible than EF.4. May be a superior discriminator of
outcomes in patients with HFrEF and
HFpEF.1. Requires dedicated software package
which is not available in all institutions.
2. Suboptimal image quality in
technically challenging studies
precludes accurate measurements.
3. Load-dependent.4. Values may vary between vendors;
hence, results may not be
interchangeable.
Color M-mode
Vp: Vp, and
E/Vp ratioVp indirectly related to the time constant
of LV relaxation ( t); (the longer it takes
for the LV to relax, the slower the Vp).Vp can be used to correct for the effectincreased preload on the transmitral E
velocity, E/Vp ratio is directly related to
the LAP.1. Relatively load-independent.
2. Vp is reliable as an index of LV
relaxation in patients with depressedLVEFs and dilated LV but not inpatients with normal EFs.
3. Helps distinguish PN from normal
transmitral inﬂow proﬁles.
4. The ratio of the transmitral E to Vp (E/
Vp)$2.5 predicts PCWP >15 mm Hg
with reasonable accuracy in patients
with depressed EFs.1. In patients with normal LV volumes
and EF but elevated LVFPs, Vp can be
misleadingly normal.
2. Vp pseudonormalization may also be
seen in patients with small,
hypertrophied ventricles.
3. Lower feasibility and reproducibility.4. Suboptimal alignment between M-
mode cursor and transmitral inﬂow
results in erroneous measurements.
TE-e0time
intervalCan identify patients with diastolic
dysfunction due to delayed onset of e0
velocity compared with onset of the
transmitral E velocity.1. Helps distinguish PN from normal
transmitral inﬂow proﬁles.
2. Ratio of IVRT to T E-e0(IVRT/T E-e0) can
be used to estimate LVFPs in normalsubjects and patients with MV
disease.
3. Can be used to differentiate patients
with restrictive cardiomyopathy who
have a prolonged time interval from
those with pericardial constriction inwhom it is not usually prolonged.1. Non-simultaneous measurements
(important to match R-R intervals).
2. More challenging to acquire
satisfactory signals with closeattention needed to sampling location,
gain, and ﬁlter settings.
3. Time intervals are numerically quite
small so any error in measurement
may prove signiﬁcant.
LAS LAS in diastolic function primarily
focused on LARS. LARS shows a direct
correlation with the degree of diastolicdysfunction (LARS worsens as thedegree of diastolic dysfunction
worsens) and is inversely related to
LVFP (the lower the LARS, the higherthe LVFP).
As a late diastolic parameter, LASct
(pump strain) is inversely related toLVEDP (the less negative the LASct,the higher the LVEDP).1. LARS provides an estimate of LVFPs
in patients with reduced EF.
2. LARS may be helpful in distinguishing
between degrees of diastolicdysfunction.
3. LARS may be used as a substitute for
missing standard variables.
4. LARS provides prognostic value in
patients with HF, AF, ischemic heart
disease, and valvular heart disease.
5. LA dysfunction identiﬁed with LARS
may show abnormalities before
anatomic changes occur.1. Requires dedicated LAS software
package which is not available in all
institutions.
2. Suboptimal image quality in
technically challenging studies
precludes accurate measurements.
3. Values are age dependent (LARS
decreases with age).
4. LARS dependent on LV systolic
function (may be normal despiteelevated LVFP in patients with normalEF with preserved LV GLS).
5. R-R gating may be an inaccurate
substitution for end-diastole (e.g.,when there is a BBB).
6. May be inaccurate when there is a
mobile atrial septum or a thin-walled
LA or when tracking does not followthe mitral annulus or follows speckles
outside of the imaging plane.
7. LARS should not be used to assess
LVFP in patients with AF, signiﬁcantMR, heart transplant recipients,
patients with normal EF and
GLS > 18%, or suspected LAstunning.
AF, Atrial ﬁbrillation; AR, atrial reversal velocity in pulmonary veins; BBB , bundle branch block; CAD , coronary artery disease; DCM , dilated cardio-
myopathy; E@A , mitral velocity at the start of atrial contraction; HFrEF , HF with reduced EF; ICU, intensive care unit; LARS , LA reservoir strain; LAS,
LA strain; LASct , LA contractile strain; LVFP , LV ﬁlling pressure; Mitral DT , E-wave deceleration time; MV, mitral valve; PAEDP , PA end-diastolic pres-
sure; PH, pulmonary HTN; PN, pseudonormal; PS, pulmonary stenosis; PV, pulmonary vein; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; RA, right atrial;
ROI, region of interest; RVOT , RV outﬂow tract; RVSP , RV systolic pressure; UEA, ultrasound enhancing agent; Vp, early diastolic ﬂow propagation
velocity; VTI, velocity time integral.550 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
Summary-level data were extracted from publications of several
population-based studies reporting the distribution of diastolicfunction measurements among subjects known to be free ofcardiovascular diseases within speciﬁed age ranges and, when
available, stratiﬁed by sex. These studies generally excluded indi-
viduals with known cardiovascular disease (e.g., coronary arterydisease, atrial ﬁbrillation, HF) or cardiovascular risk factors (e.g.,
hypertension, diabetes, obesity, renal dysfunction). Not all mea-
surements were available in all studies. Using summary data onvalues by age group, we identiﬁed the normal ranges for diastolic
measurements on the basis of their ﬁfth and 95th percentile limits.
Details of the data extraction, harmonization, and statistical anal-ysis used to derive these limits are provided in the Supplemental
Appendix . A list of studies used for data extraction is provided
inSupplemental Table 2 .
Supplemental Figures 5 to 16 display the resulting estimated ﬁfth
and 95th percentile limits of diastolic measurements by age and
sex, while Table 5 provides the estimated normal ranges for each dia-
stolic measurement by decade of life. Expanded data are provided intheSupplemental Appendix .Supplemental Table 3 provides ﬁfth and
95th percentile reference limits for each diastolic measurement by
age decade. Supplemental Figures 17 to 32 provide additional plots
of the ﬁfth and 95th percentile limits of each diastolic measure by
age, including 95% CIs and the associated scatterplot of the source
data.
Differences in normal ranges by age were observed for measure-
ments on the basis of transmitral ﬂow velocities (E velocity, A veloc-
ity, E/A ratio), tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) early diastolic velocity
(e
0), E/e0ratio, tricuspid regurgitation (TR) peak velocity, and LA vol-
ume (maximum LA volume index [LAVi]) and function (LA reser-
voir strain [LARS]; P< .001 for all). Statistical differences in ﬁfth
and 95th percentile limits were observed by sex for E and Avelocities but not for E/A ratio or the other measurements assessed.
For LAVi, differences were also observed by method of measure-ment: biplane method of disks vs area-length method(Supplemental Figures 27 and 28 ). For LARS, differences were
noted on the basis of the speckle-tracking strain software vendor
used ( Supplemental Figures 31 and 32 ).
4. REFERENCE RANGES COMPARED WITH PROGNOSTIC
VALUES FOR DIASTOLIC FUNCTION MEASUREMENTS
The values provided in this section are based on an estimate of
the most extreme 10% of values from individuals of varying
ages free of known cardiovascular disease or traditional risk fac-
tors. It is important to recognize that prognostically relevant alter-ations in diastolic measurements can occur within the range ofnormal values deﬁned in this way. Among >5,700 older adults
(>65 years of age) in the ARIC (Atherosclerosis Risk in
Communities) study, increases in the incidence of HF or deathwere observed at values of septal e
0velocity < 6 cm/s (lower
10th percentile limit 4.6 cm/s) and lateral e0velocity < 7 cm/s
(lower 10th percentile limit 5.2 cm/s). Additionally, in this studyE/e
0ratio and LAVi demonstrated monotonic and near linear as-
sociations with incidence of HF or death, without evidence of a
clear threshold with respect to prognosis. Additional studieswith greater power and inclusion of individuals of broader agerange will be necessary to determine if similar patterns are seen
in younger individuals, and to reﬁne estimates of prognostically
relevant thresholds for diastolic measurements. As noted above,these data also do not address ‘‘optimal’’ values for these diastolic
measurements, which may be obscured by their population-level
age-related changes.Table 5 Normal reference ranges for diastolic measurements by age category
Diastolic measureAge, y
20-39 40-60 60-80
E wave, m/s 0.54 (0.52-0.57) to 1.11 (1.07-1.16) 0.47 (0.46-0.49) to 1.02 (0.99-1.05) 0.39 (0.37-0.42) to 0.92 (0.88-0.96)
A wave, m/s 0.24 (0.21-0.27) to 0.68 (0.63-0.72) 0.33 (0.32-0.35) to 0.82 (0.80-0.84) 0.43 (0.40-0.45) to 0.97 (0.93-1.00)E/A ratio 0.88 (0.82-0.94) to 2.73 (2.66-2.81) 0.69 (0.66-0.73) to 2.07 (2.03-2.11) 0.50 (0.45-0.56) to 1.40 (1.34-1.47)
e
0lateral (cm/s) 9.9 (9.4-10.4) to 22.1 (21.5-22.8) 7.5 (7.3-7.8) to 17.5 (17.1-17.9) 5.2 (4.8-5.6) to 13.0 (12.4-13.5)
e0septal (cm/s) 7.2 (6.8-7.7) to 16.4 (16.0-16.9) 5.7 (5.4-5.9) to 13.5 (13.2-13.8) 4.1 (3.7-4.5) to 10.6 (10.1-11.0)
e0average (cm/s) 8.7 (8.2-9.2) to 19.1 (18.6-19.7) 6.7 (6.4-7.0) to 15.4 (15.1-15.7) 4.7 (4.3-5.1) to 11.7 (11.2-12.2)
E/e0lateral 2.5 (2.0-3.0) to 6.3 (5.3-7.2) 3.6 (3.4-3.9) to 9.4 (8.9-10.0) 4.8 (4.5-5.0) to 12.6 (12.0-13.2)
E/e0septal 4.0 (3.3-4.7) to 9.1 (8.2-9.9) 4.9 (4.6-5.3) to 12.1 (11.7-12.6) 5.9 (5.5-6.3) to 15.2 (14.7-15.7)
E/e0average 4.0 (3.8-4.3) to 9.1 (8.5-9.7) 4.6 (4.4-4.8) to 11.5 (11.2-11.9) 5.2 (4.9-5.4) to 14.0 (13.4-14.5)
LAVi, mL/m212.1 (10.9-13.2) to 39.4 (34.6-44.2) 12.9 (12.2-13.5) to 38.3 (35.4-41.1) 13.7 (12.7-14.6) to 37.1 (33.0-41.3)
LAVi, Simpson, mL/m212.5 (12.0-13.0) to 41.9 (38.1-45.6) 13.3 (13.0-13.6) to 41.0 (38.5-43.4) 14.2 (13.7-14.6) to 40.0 (36.5-43.6)
LAVi, A-L, mL/m28.9 (3.9-13.9) to 20.9 (12.9-28.8) 11.0 (8.9-13.0) to 27.1 (24.0-30.3) 13.0 (9.9-16.0) to 33.4 (28.6-38.2)
TR velocity, m/s 1.3 (1.1-1.5) to 2.7 (2.6-2.7) 1.5 (1.4-1.6) to 2.7 (2.7-2.7) 1.7 (1.5-1.8) to 2.8 (2.7-2.8)LA strain, % 29.5 (27.6-31.3) to 63.2 (59.9-66.5) 26.8 (25.6-28.0) to 57.7 (55.6-59.9) 24.1 (22.2-26.0) to 52.3 (48.9-55.7)
LAS, TomTec, % 29.9 (27.0-32.9) to 60.5 (57.6-63.4) 27.5 (25.7-29.4) to 55.4 (53.6-57.2) 25.1 (22.6-27.6) to 50.3 (47.9-52.7)
LAS, EchoPAC, % 29.5 (27.9-31.1) to 64.9 (59.7-70.2) 25.3 (24.0-26.5) to 61.5 (57.4-65.6) 21.1 (18.7-23.4) to 58.1 (50.3-65.8)
Reference values are based of ﬁfth and 95th percentile values derived from regression equations to ﬁt summary data from persons free of cardio-
vascular disease or risk factors (see Supplemental Appendix ). Values displayed are: ﬁfth percentile limit (95% conﬁdence limits) to 95th percentile
limit (95% conﬁdence limit).Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 551
5. AGE-INDEPENDENT INDICES OF ELEVATED LV FILLING
PRESSURES
Some indices of L V diastolic pressures are age independent. These
indices are changes in mitral inﬂow velocities with Valsalva maneuver,
and the difference in duration between pulmonary vein Ar velocity and
mitral A velocity.1The Valsalva maneuver can help distinguish normal
L V ﬁlling from pseudonormal ﬁlling (and whether restrictive L V ﬁlling is
reversible or not) because a decrease in E/A ratio of $50% is highly
speciﬁc for increased L V ﬁlling pressures.1The procedure should be
standardized by continuously recording mitral inﬂow using pulsed-wave Doppler for 10 seconds during the strain phase of the maneuver.
An increase in Ar-A duration is consistent with increased L VEDP.
Pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) identiﬁes patients withincreased L V ﬁlling pressures, provided pulmonary vascular disease
is excluded.
1The presence of a triphasic transmitral inﬂow proﬁle
with mid-diastolic ﬂow (L-wave) velocity $50 cm/s occurs in patients
with markedly delayed L V relaxation and increased LAP.1A similar
pattern may be seen on mitral annular velocity recordings and with
mitral valve M-mode tracings.
6. LV STRUCTURE AND LA VOLUME AND FUNCTION
In many patients with diastolic dysfunction, L V and LA structural
changes are present. LA enlargement, in the absence of chronic atrialarrhythmia and mitral valve disease, is a marker of chronic elevation
of LAP.
1,7,9However, this conclusion should be reached only after
exclusion of other reasons for LA enlargement, including anemia, hearttransplant recipients with biatrial technique, hyperdynamic state, or
athletic status. Hence it is important to pay attention to the clinical
setting.
Pathologic L V hypertrophy is usually associated with increased L V
chamber stiffness. The presence of increased L V mass index and LA
enlargement are among the criteria for the diagnosis of HFpEF, aswill be discussed later.
5,7-9
7. LV GLOBAL LONGITUDINAL STRAIN
In some patients with diastolic dysfunction and normal EF, including
those with and those without HFpEF, L V global longitudinal function
is reduced.7-9Abnormal L V longitudinal systolic function can be
detected by using speckle-tracking to measure global longitudinalstrain (GLS, Supplemental Figure 2 ). Although not an index of L V dia-
stolic function, reduced L V GLS is one of the criteria used for HFpEF
evaluation and is associated with worse outcomes in many cardiovas-
cular diseases associated with diastolic dysfunction, including cardio-myopathies and left sided valvular heart disease (see theSupplemental Appendix for technical aspects of acquisition and mea-
surement).
8. LA STRAIN
LA strain has emerged as a useful parameter for estimating L V ﬁlling
pressures. Additional details pertaining to acquisition and measure-ments can be found in Supplemental Table 1 and Supplemental
Figures 3 and4. Obtained by STE imaging, LA strain is available on
most ultrasound systems, and ofﬂine analysis is also possible.
Accuracy for LAP estimation is highest in patients with depressedLV E F.
10In addition, it is possible to divide LARS by the E/e0ratio to yield
a noninvasive index of LA stiffness.11This index has the highest accu-
racy in comparison with other echocardiographic measurements inidentifying patients with HFpEF
12and in identifying patients with
HFpEF who are most likely to be hospitalized for HF management.13
9. OTHER IMAGING MODALITIES FOR ASSESSMENT OF LV
DIASTOLIC FUNCTION
Radionuclide angiography, cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR), and
cardiac computed tomography (CT) can be used to measure L V ﬁllingrates. In addition, CT and CMR have been applied to measure mitralannular diastolic velocities, albeit with consistent underestimation in
comparison with TDI. As a result, the other imaging modalities are
not routinely applied for evaluation of L V diastolic function.However, they can provide valuable insights into L V structural changes
including more precise measurement of L V mass and volumes. Using
CMR, it is possible to identify and to quantify the extent of replacementand interstitial ﬁbrosis.
14,15Importantly, the ﬁbrosis burden adds incre-
mental value to echocardiographic assessment of L V diastolic function
for risk stratiﬁcation of patients with, or at risk for, HF.16
10. DEFINITION OF LV DIASTOLIC DYSFUNCTION USING
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
L V diastolic function is assessed on the basis of L V relaxation and
myocardial stiffness. Patients with diastolic dysfunction can havenormal or elevated L V ﬁlling pressures. The existing echocardio-
graphic surrogates of L V relaxation and L V chamber stiffness are not
perfect and thus patients with diastolic dysfunction can be missedby echocardiography if one were to rely on a single variable.
Accordingly, the working group recommends a combination of echo-
cardiographic measurements for diagnosis of diastolic dysfunction.These include an index of L V relaxation, echocardiographic variablesof reduced early diastolic L V ﬁlling relative to late diastolic ﬁlling, and
functional and structural changes related to elevated LAP and L V
diastolic pressures ( Figure 2 ).
ForL Vrelaxation,the best indicesare mitralannulare
0velocity and L V
diastolic strain rate during isovolumic relaxation and early diastole.9Of
thethree indices, e0velocity has thehighest feasibility and reproducibility
for daily application. Ideally, cutoff values that are associated with clini-
cally relevant events should be sought and considered in the deﬁnition
of normal function. However, data with respect to association with out-comes is available only for individuals >65 years of age and not youngersubjects. Thus, the working group chose normal ranges for subjects
<65 years of age and prognostically low-risk features in subjectsKey Points
1. Numerous studies have demonstrated the association between
age and echocardiographic measurements of L V diastolic func-
tion.
2. Normal ranges are not necessarily equivalent to ‘‘optimal’’
values, as the aging process itself may affect diastolic function.
3. E/e0ratio and LAVi have near linear associations with inci-
dence of HF or death, without evidence of a clear thresholdwith respect to prognosis.552 Nagueh et al
Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
>65 years of age. Of note, the cutoff values based on normal ranges in
subjects >65 years of age are very similar to the ones that are associated
with worse outcomes. The recommended cutoffs for e0velocity, which
are based on reported normal values, are shown in Table 6 .
Mitral annular e0velocity is determined by L V relaxation, restoring
forces, and lengthening load.9,17,18On a cellular level, the rate of L V
relaxation reﬂects the decay of active force developed during systole.The restoring forces account for diastolic suction and can be repre-sented by the behavior of an elastic spring that is compressed to a
dimension less than its resting length during systole, and recoils
back to the resting length during diastole when the compression isreleased. The lengthening load is the pressure in the left atrium at
the mitral valve opening, which ‘‘pushes’’ blood into, and thereby
lengthens the L V. The dependence of e
0on LAP is most prominent
in the presence of normal L V relaxation, whereas the effect of LAP
on e0velocity is absent or reduced in the presence of diastolic dysfunc-
tion.17This is due to the delay in e0velocity such that it occurs when
L V pressure equals or exceeds LAP.19,20
For surrogates of LAP, E/A and E/e0ratios and LARS are the recom-
mended measurements. For structural surrogates, LA Vi and L V mass in-dex are the recommended indices. Given the direct dependence of e
0
velocity on L V relaxation, it is the ﬁrst index in the algorithm. If abnor-
mally reduced, only one additional variable is needed from the func-
tional and structural variables discussed above. If e0velocity is not
reduced, then two abnormal variables as shown in Figure 2 are needed
to diagnose the presence of diastolic dysfunction. A reduced E/A ratio
for age is due to impaired L Vrelaxation leading to reduced early diastolicL V ﬁlling relative to late diastolic L V ﬁlling, whereas E/A $2, average E/
e
0> 14, and LARS < 18% are consistent with elevated LAP.11. ALGORITHM FOR ESTIMATION OF MEAN LAP AT REST
Echocardiography can estimate mean LAP using several parameters.
During echocardiographic determination of diastolic function and
ﬁlling pressure, the patient’s rhythm, heart rate, and blood pressure
should be recorded as they affect both L V diastolic function andthe Doppler indices used in the algorithm ( Figure 3 ). No single
approach can estimate mean LAP in all clinical situations. Figure 3
presents the validated main algorithm (21), irrespective of L VEF, ina practical approach that can be applied to most patients. The algo-
rithm in Figure 3 applies to all patients in sinus rhythm except for cases
described in the special population sections. In subsequent sections,speciﬁc recommendations for special groups are discussed.
In clinical studies, LAVi is often inconsistent with other indices of
LAP. True LA volume is often overlooked, and in some patients,this measurement is technically challenging. Furthermore, the correla-tion between LAP and LA volumes is not strong and LA volumes fail
to track changes in LAP.
2,21In addition, there are other causes for LA
enlargement including anemia, athletic heart, high cardiac outputstates, atrial arrhythmias, and mitral valve disease. Therefore, unlikeSTEP 1
Assess e’ as marker of impaired
LV relaxaƟon
•e’ septal ≤6 cm/s or
•lateral ≤ 7 or
•Average ≤ 6.5*STEP 2
Assess markers of LA/LV
remodeling and elevated LAP
•Average E/e’ > 14
•LARS ≤ 18%
•E/A≤0.8 *, or ≥2
•LAVI > 34 ml/m2¶Diastolic dysfuncƟon
present if:
•e’ reduced & 1 or more
markers in Step 2 present or
•e’ preserved, but 2 or more
markers in Step 2 present
* : can also consider age speciﬁc cutoﬀ values to idenƟfy abnormally red uced e’ velocity or abnormally reduced E/A raƟo
: aŌer excluding LA enlargement in athletes, or due to anemia, atrial ﬁbri llaƟon or ﬂuƩer, and mitral valve disease
¶ : another ﬁnding consistent with diastolic dysfuncƟon: LV mass index > 95 g/m2in women or 115 g/m2in men, aŌer
exclusion of increased LV mass in athletes
Figure 2 Steps for diagnosing LV diastolic dysfunction.
Key Points
1. L V diastolic dysfunction is identiﬁed on the basis of mitral
annulus e0velocity measurements, reduced early diastolic L V
ﬁlling relative to late diastolic ﬁlling, and structural and func-tional surrogates of LAP and L V diastolic pressures.
2. Septal e
0velocity < 6 cm/s, lateral e0velocity < 7 cm/s, or
average e0velocity < 6.5 cm/s indicates abnormal L V relaxa-
tion irrespective of age.
3. Age-independent indices of L V ﬁlling pressure include changes
in mitral inﬂow velocities with the Valsalva maneuver and theTable 6 Mitral annular e0velocity values for diagnosis of
impaired LV relaxation
20-39 y 40-65 y >65 y
1. Septal e0, cm/s <7 <6 <6
2. Lateral e0, cm/s <10 <8 <7
3. Average e0, cm/s <9 <7 <6.5difference in duration between pulmonary vein Ar velocity
and mitral A velocity.
4. Patients with diastolic dysfunction and HFpEF frequently have
abnormalities in L V structure and systolic function as well as inLA volume and function.
5. L V ﬁlling rates and LA volume and function can be assessed us-
ing cardiac CTand CMR. CMR determination of replacement
and interstitial ﬁbrosis provides incremental prognostic valueto the echocardiographic assessment of L V diastolic function.Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 553
the 2016 guidelines, the algorithm in Figure 3 includes LAVi in the
second stage, if needed.
The algorithm in Figure 3 begins with mitral annular e0velocity, E/
e0ratio, and peak TR velocity or PASP. When the right atrial pressure
(RAP) can be estimated, decisions about LAP should be based on
whether PASP is $35 mm Hg or not. If RAP cannot be estimated,
then peak TR velocity should be relied on, and a peak
velocity $2.8 m/s in the absence of pulmonary parenchymal or
vascular disease supports the conclusion that LAP is elevated. TheTR jet should be obtained from multiple windows and the use of
intravenous saline or ultrasound enhancing agents is encouraged in
cases with incomplete TR jet, to enhance the jet and obtain a com-plete TR envelope. Caution should be exercised to avoid measuring
the peak velocity from blooming artifacts.
For estimation of LAP at rest, the presence of all three ﬁndings of
reduced e
0velocity, increased E/e0ratio, and PASP $35 mm Hg or
peak TR velocity $2.8 m/s when RAP cannot be estimated, supports
the conclusion of elevated LAP. Subsequently, diastolic function is
classiﬁed as grade 2 if the E/A ratio is <2 or grade 3 if the E/A ratiois$2. If all three variables do not meet the cutoff values for elevated
LAP in Figure 3 , then LAP is normal, and the patient has normal dia-
stolic function.
Grade 1 diastolic dysfunction is present when e
0velocity is reduced
with normal E/e0ratio and normal PASP, along with E/A ratio #0.8.
When e0velocity is reduced and the E/A ratio is >0.8, then additional
variables should be considered as LAP can be elevated in some ofthese patients. Likewise, if only PASP or only E/e
0ratio, or any two
of the three variables (e0velocity, E/e0ratio, and PASP) are consistent
with elevated LAP, then additional variables should be evaluated.
The additional variables recommended are LARS, pulmonary vein
systolic to diastolic velocities ratio, LAVi, or alternatively IVRT. If
LARS, pulmonary vein systolic to diastolic velocities ratio, IVRT,and LAVi do not meet the cutoff threshold for elevated LAP, then
LAP is likely normal. In symptomatic patients, diastolic exercise echo-cardiography is recommended when LAP at rest is normal to increasethe sensitivity of detecting patients with HFpEF when there are indi-
cators of abnormal LA/L V morphology and/or function ( Figure 3 ).
LARS can be readily obtained in most patients with satisfactory 2D
apical views (see the Supplemental Appendix for technical details). If
LARS is #18%, then LAP is elevated. LARS #18% has high speciﬁcity
but can have low sensitivity in patients with normal L VEF for detectingelevated LAP.
3,10,22On the other hand, relying on LARS cutoff values
of 19% to 24%, which is in the low normal range,10leads to higher
sensitivity and lower speciﬁcity for detecting elevated LAP.
For pulmonary venous ﬂow velocities, previous work showed that
a systolic ﬁlling fraction (systolic velocity-time integral [VTI]/systolic
VTI + diastolic VTI) of #40% has good accuracy in identifying pa-
tients with elevated mean LAP.1The corresponding value for pulmo-
nary vein systolic velocity–to–diastolic velocity ratio of #0.67 is equal
to#40% systolic ﬁlling fraction and is therefore recommended. The
ratio is most reliable in patients with L V systolic dysfunction andshould not be considered in normal subjects with normal echocardio-
graphic results, when the ratio can be #0.67. In patients with normal
L VEF, the ratio can be >0.67 despite elevated L V ﬁlling pressures. Inthese patients, conﬁrmation should be sought with IVRT, and if IVRT
is not available, then other parameters discussed in the ‘‘Supplemental
Parameters’’ section below should be analyzed to reach a conclusionabout LAP. IVRT #70 ms is consistent with elevated LAP. If the ﬁnd-
ings indicate elevated LAP, then grading diastolic function should be
pursued on the basis of E/A ratio ( Figure 3 ).
Supplemental Parameters
These can be relied on in the absence of the three parameters in the
section above.3 of the above
Grade 2
(Mild/Mod ↑↑LAP)Grade 3
(Marked ↑LAP)E/A <  2 E/A ≥  21. Reduced e’ velocity:  septal ≤ 6or lateral ≤ 7o r  average ≤6.5cm/s *
2. Increased E/e’: septal ≥ 15 or lateral ≥ 13 or average ≥ 14
3. Increased TR velocity ≥ 2.8 m/s or PASP ≥ 35 mm Hg
≥1 present
Diastolic Exercise 
Echo NoneE/A≤ 0.8 E/A > 0.8
Grade 1Reduced e’ only
If symptomaticNormal DFAll normal
Normal LAPExcept in
MAC, MR, MS¶
Atrial FibrillationLVAD
Non-cardiac PHHTX
Pericardial 
constrictionLV Diastolic Function Grading & LAP Estimation 
Increased LAPPulmonary Vein S/D ≤0.67 or
LARS ≤  18% or LAVi > 34 mL/m2
Alternatively 
IVRT  ≤ 70 ms
If none available or reliable use 
Supplemental methodsȚIncreased TR/PASP only or
Increased E/e’ only or 
Any 2 abnormal variables
Figure 3 Algorithm for estimation of mean LAP for patients in sinus rhythm and who do not have severe primary MR, any degree of
mitral stenosis (MS), or moderate or severe MAC. The algorithm should also not be applied to patients in atrial ﬁbrillation, heart trans-
plant (HTX) recipients, noncardiac PH, pericardial constriction or LV assist device (LVAD). *For annular e0velocity, age-adjusted lower
limits of normal values shown in Table 6 can be applied in place of the values shown in this ﬁgure.{The algorithm should also not be
applied to patients with mitral valve repair, mitral valve replacement, or mitral-transcatheter edge-to-edge repair. DF, Diastolic func-
tion; Ț, PR end-diastolic velocity $2m/s, PA diastolic pressure $16 mm Hg, mitral inﬂow L-wave velocity $50 cm/s, Ar-A
duration > 30 ms, and/or a decrease in mitral E/A ratio of $50% with Valsalva maneuver.554 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
a. Pulmonary regurgitation (PR) end-diastolic velocity: An end-diastolic veloc-
ity$2 m/s or pulmonary artery (PA) diastolic pressure $16 mm Hg is
consistent with elevated LAP in the absence of pulmonary disease. Ultra-
sound enhancing agents can facilitate recording of a complete PR jet.
b. Mitral inﬂow L-wave velocity: This is a mid-diastolic velocity that occurs af-
ter the mitral E wave. It was initially described in normal healthy young in-dividuals with bradycardia with peak velocity <40 cm/s. Later, it was also
noted in patients with marked delay in myocardial relaxation and increased
ﬁlling pressure. Because of delayed relaxation, L V diastolic pressure falls af-ter the initial rise from L V ﬁlling, resulting in a mid-diastolic LA-L V pressure
gradient, leading to blood ﬂow into the left ventricle with peak
velocity $50 cm/s. Therefore, the presence of an L-wave velocity
$50 cm/s is an indicator of both impaired L V relaxation and elevated LAP.
c. Premature termination of mitral inﬂow before QRS complex and diastolic
mitral regurgitation (MR): Diastolic MR is recognized as diastolic ﬂow
from the left ventricle to the left atrium and can be indicative of increasedL VEDP. It is analogous to the ‘‘B’’ bump on a mitral valve M-mode trace.However, this can also happen when the electrocardiographic PR interval
is >200 ms with sufﬁcient atrial relaxation before systole. Therefore, one
should be careful to exclude advanced atrioventricular (AV) block, atrialﬂutter, and organized atrial ﬁbrillation activity before attributing diastolicMR to increased L V diastolic pressures.
d. Pulmonary vein atrial reversal velocity: In the evolution of diastolic dysfunc-
tion, there is an early stage when L VEDP is elevated but mean LAP isnormal. This stage is diagnosed on the basis of a high amplitude
(>35 cm/s) and long duration of pulmonary vein Ar velocity, along with
an Ar-A duration >30 ms.
e. Changes in mitral inﬂow with Valsalva: A decrease in E/A ratio of $50%
with the Valsalva maneuver is speciﬁc for elevated LAP.
The evaluation of L V diastolic function should not stop at the algo-
rithm above in symptomatic patients with grade 1 diastolic dysfunc-
tion. These patients should be referred for diastolic exercise
echocardiography.
12. REPORTING ON DIASTOLIC FUNCTION
All echocardiographic reports should include an assessment of dia-
stolic function grading and ﬁlling pressure, indicating whether diastolicfunction is normal or abnormal with grade 1, 2 (mild to moderate in-
crease in LAP), or 3 (marked increase in LAP). If the interpreting cardi-
ologist is unable to determine the grade of diastolic dysfunction, thestatus of L V ﬁlling pressure should be mentioned in the report
(whether LAP is normal or elevated). An isolated increase in
L VEDP should be reported, as it predisposes patients to elevatedmean LAP with exercise, faster heart rate, or increased afterload.
Whenever possible, the report should mention whether a change
has occurred in L V diastolic function grade in comparison with previ-ous studies.
Measurements that should be included in the report are mitral
inﬂow velocities, mitral annular e
0velocity, peak TR velocity, E/A ratio,
and average E/e0ratio (unless only one side is acquired or satisfactory).
LARS, pulmonary vein S/D ratio or systolic ﬁlling fraction, mitral inﬂow
A duration, pulmonary vein Ar duration, and/or IVRT should be
included in the report if relied on to arrive at the conclusions pertainingto diastolic function grade and mean LAP.
13. DIASTOLIC EXERCISE ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
L V ﬁlling pressure at rest may not be sufﬁcient to evaluate a patient with
dyspnea that happens mostly with exertion. Importantly, up to 50% ofpatients with HFpEF have normal L V ﬁlling pressure at rest that in-creases rapidly with exercise or even leg raising.
23Echocardiography
can determine the status of L Vrelaxation by measuring e0velocity.9,17,18
In normal subjects, mitral e0increases about 3 to 5 cm/s on average with
exercise,24but in subjects with diastolic dysfunction, e0velocity does
not increase as much as in a normal subject, or not at all. In patients
with diastolic dysfunction, mitral inﬂow E velocity increases with exer-cise and e
0does not change as much, such that E/e0ratio increases.
Normal E/e0values have been published for middle-age and young sub-
jects using treadmill or supine bicycle exercise with remarkably similarvalues of 6 to 8 at rest and with exercise. It rarely becomes higher than
10. Several studies have shown a good correlation between E/e
0ratio
and invasively obtained PCWP, LAP, or L V mean diastolic pressurewith variable levels of effort, including day-to-day activity as well as dur-ing supine bicycle exercise in the catheterization laboratory.
23,25-27
A. Indications
Diastolic stress testing is most valuable when resting echocardiography
does not explain the symptoms of HF or exertional dyspnea. In general,
patients with completely normal diastolic function at rest with pre-served e
0velocity need not undergo stress testing as it is highly unlikely
that they will develop elevated ﬁlling pressures with exercise. Likewise,
patients with abnormal ﬁndings at baseline consistent with elevated L Vﬁlling pressures should not be referred for stress testing as the cardiacetiology for dyspnea is already established and their ﬁlling pressures
will almost certainly increase further with exercise. The most appro-
priate patient population for diastolic exercise testing is the group of pa-tients with grade 1 diastolic dysfunction, which indicates the presence
of delayed myocardial relaxation and normal mean LAP at rest. The
diagnostic evaluation of symptomatic patients with indeterminate dia-stolic function or ﬁlling pressure at rest can also beneﬁt from diastolic
stress testing. LARS has been reported to identify patients who are
more likely to develop increased ﬁlling pressure with exercise.
28
B. Performance
Diastolic stress testing can be performed using either supine bicycle or
treadmill exercise echocardiography. The use of dobutamine stresstesting for the assessment of diastolic function is strongly discouraged.
For supine bicycle exercise, there is sufﬁcient time during each stage
of exercise to acquire 2D images, mitral inﬂow velocities, annular veloc-ities, and peak TR velocity. For treadmill exercise, 2D images are ob-
tained ﬁrst to assess wall motion for myocardial ischemia. Mitral
inﬂow velocities are usually fused during exercise, and it would bemost helpful to obtain TR velocity ﬁrst, immediately after wall motionanalysis, followed by mitral inﬂow and annular velocities when E and A
velocities are not fused. When L V ﬁlling pressure is elevated with exer-
cise, it usually remains elevated for several minutes, providing sufﬁcienttime to acquire Doppler velocities after acquisition of parasternal and
apical views for L V wall motion and volume analysis. As soon as mitral
E and A velocities are separated, mitral annular and mitral inﬂow veloc-ities (in this order) are acquired. In patients with atrial ﬁbrillation, dia-
stolic function parameters can be obtained immediately after
recording 2D views. Recently, lung scanning to detect ‘‘B’’ lines, whichindicates water in the lung or pulmonary venous congestion, was intro-duced as a part of diastolic exercise stress echocardiography.
29In some
patients, similar information can be obtained with simple leg raising for
1 minute using a regular echocardiographic examination table.However, this simple method lacks sufﬁcient sensitivity.
30Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 555
C. Interpretation
The results are considered deﬁnitely abnormal, indicating increased L V
ﬁlling pressure when the following conditions are met: average E/e0
ratio$14 or septal E/e0ratio$15 and peak TR velocity > 3.2 m/s.
The test indicates normal ﬁlling pressure when average (or septal) E/e0
is <10 and peak TR velocity is <2.8 m/s. HFpEF diagnosis is not sup-
ported by an E/e0r a t i o< 1 4 ,e v e nw i t ha ni n c r e a s ei np e a kT Rv e l o c i t y
to >3.2 m/s. HFpEF diagnosis is considered likely when E/e0ratio is
>14 and the peak TR velocity is >2.8 but <3.2 m/s. One should becautious in drawing conclusions on the basis of an isolated increase in
exercise peak TR velocity, as normal subjects can have signiﬁcant in-
creases in peak TR velocity related to increased pulmonary bloodﬂow. After analysis of >14,000 diastolic exercise echocardiograms, itwas found that 17% of patients develop increased L V ﬁlling pressure
with exercise, while 28% have evidence of myocardial ischemia.
31
Patients with increased ﬁlling pressure after exercise but no ischemia
have a worse prognosis than patients with isolated ischemia.31In addi-
tion, PASP > 50 mm Hg or TR velocity > 3.2 m/s portends a worse
outcome,31hence the recommendation for this cutoff value. An inva-
sive hemodynamic investigation, including the use of exercise, may be
necessary when exercise echocardiographic assessment is negative or
indeterminate in a patient with a clinical presentation concerning forHFpEF.
14. APPLICATION OF AI TO THE ASSESSMENT OF LV
DIASTOLIC FUNCTION
Given the complexity of diastolic function assessment, both in terms of
the need to measure numerous parameters and the requirement of
data integration to grade the severity, the application of AI to streamlinethese processes through automating both parameter measurement and
severity grading would be highly valuable. This type of application has
been demonstrated in few studies that used a rule-based algorithm tograde diastolic function on the basis of measurements obtained by ex-
perts or by machine learning models, including some studies that used
electrocardiographic ﬁndings relying on data from close to 100,000paired echocardiograms and electrocardiograms.
32,33Interestingly,
electrocardiographic ﬁndings showed good accuracy in identifying
the three grades of diastolic dysfunction, with similar prognostic valueto echocardiography.
33
Several approaches have been tested for AI-assisted diastolic func-
tion assessment. Multiple-view approaches involve the use of machinelearning models to automate view classiﬁcation, view segmentation,
and input of the machine-derived measurements into a rule-based de-cision tree algorithm for severity classiﬁcation using the 2016 guide-lines as a reference.
33-35Single-view approaches have also been
studied. These often involve the segmentation of LA and L V volumes,
measurement of L VEF and longitudinal strain, and training the modelto identify which combination of LA and L V metrics provides the most
accurate grading of diastolic function.
33,35-37Other single-view ap-
proaches use a deep-learning neural network to train models to iden-tify and grade diastolic function directly from the 2D apical four-
chamber videos without segmentation.
33-35All these approaches
have used the 2016 guideline as a reference, and thus, they aresimilarly prone to grading several cases as indeterminate.
Machine learning models based on clinical outcomes
38,39offer a
more evidence-based approach to optimizing the classiﬁcation of dia-
stolic function with both reduction of ‘‘indeterminate’’ cases andimprovement of the clinical relevance of diastolic function classiﬁca-
tion. Recognizing that diastolic function represents a continuum
from normal function to the most severe diastolic dysfunction grade,the ability to accurately assess where a patient is in that continuum is
important for prognostication and management purposes. T o that
end, a continuous diastolic function score has been developed onthe basis of inputs of traditional diastolic parameters on echocardiogra-
phy, even for cases that would have been labeled indeterminate ac-
cording to the reference guidelines.
32Further validation of this
model and other models using invasive hemodynamics and clinicaloutcomes is needed to establish precision, reproducibility, and clinical
relevance. Vendor reporting systems based on AI that incorporate
several echocardiographic measurements to arrive at a conclusionregarding L V diastolic function are needed as they have the potential
of increasing the incorporation of diastolic function assessment results
in clinical reports.
15. ASSESSMENT OF LV DIASTOLIC FUNCTION AND
ESTIMATION OF LV FILLING PRESSURES IN SPECIALPOPULATIONS
In the following sections we discuss the pathophysiology of disorders
with abnormal cardiac structure, valve disease, and atrial arrhythmias,
which modify the relationship between indices of diastolic functionand L V ﬁlling pressure ( Table 7
40-58).Key Points
1. The application of AI can enhance the noninvasive assessment
of L V diastolic function by automating parameter measure-
ment and severity grading.
2. There are multiple- and single-view approaches. Single-view
approaches involve the segmentation of LA and L V volumes,measurement of L VEF and longitudinal strain, and trainingthe model to identify which combination of LA and L V metricsprovides the most accurate grading of diastolic function.
3. Machine learning models based on clinical outcomes offer a
more evidence-based approach to optimize the classiﬁcation
of diastolic function.
4. Validation of AI models using invasive hemodynamics and
clinical outcomes is needed to establish their precision, repro-ducibility, and clinical relevance.Key Points
1. Diastolic exercise stress testing is indicated in patients with dys-
pnea and grade 1 diastolic dysfunction at rest and in patientswith indeterminate L V ﬁlling pressure at rest. It is performed us-ing supine bicycle or treadmill exercise stress testing.
2. At rest, mitral E and e
0velocities should be recorded, along
with the peak velocity of TR, using agitated saline if needed.
The same parameters are recorded during exercise or 1 to 2 mi-nutes after termination of exercise when E and A velocities arenot merged, because increased ﬁlling pressures usually persistfor a few minutes.
3. The result is considered positive when during exercise, average
E/e
0ratio is$14 (or septal E/e0ratio is$15) and peak TR ve-
locity is $3.2 m/s.556 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
A. Assessment of LV Diastolic Function in Patients With
Valvular Heart Disease
a. Mitral stenosis: Usually, patients with mitral stenosis have normal or
reduced L V diastolic pressures, except for the rare occurrence of coexistingmyocardial disease. The same hemodynamic ﬁndings are present in patientswith other etiologies of L V inﬂow obstruction, such as a large LA tumor ob-
structing L V inﬂow, or cor triatriatum. A short IVRT (<60 ms) and mitral A
velocity > 1.5 m/s are usual ﬁndings in patients with increased LAP. Thetime interval between the onset of mitral E and annular e
0velocities (T E-
e0) can be applied to estimate L V ﬁlling pressures in patients with mitral valve
disease. In the presence of impaired L Vrelaxation, e0velocity is reduced andTable 7 Indicators of elevated LV ﬁlling pressures in special populations
Disease Echocardiographic measurements indicative of elevated LV ﬁlling pressure
1. Atrial ﬁbrillation40-421. DT < 160 ms in patients with depressed LVEF
2. Peak acceleration rate of mitral E velocity ( $1,900 cm/s2)
3. IVRT ( #65 ms)
4. DT of pulmonary venous diastolic velocity ( #220 ms)
5. E/Vp ratio ( $1.4)
6. Septal E/e0ratio ($11)
7. Peak TR velocity > 2.8 m/s
2. Sinus tachycardia43,441. Predominant early LV ﬁlling pattern with depressed LVEF
2. IVRT #70 ms is speciﬁc (79%)
3. Pulmonary vein systolic ﬁlling fraction #40% is speciﬁc (88%)
4. Average E/e0ratio > 14 (high speciﬁcity but low sensitivity)
5. When E and A velocities are partially or completely fused, the presence of a compensatory period after premature
beats often leads to separation of E and A velocities which can be used for assessment of diastolic function
3. HCM451. Average E/e0(>14)
2. Ar-A ( $30 ms)
3. Peak TR velocity (>2.8 m/s)
4. LA maximum volume index (>34 mL/m2)
4. Restrictive
cardiomyopathy46-491. Average E/e0(>14)
2. DT < 140 ms *
3. E/A ratio > 2.5 *
4. IVRT < 50 ms *
5. PH50,511. E/A $2 favors postcapillary PH
2. E/A #0.8 favors precapillary PH
3. When E/A ratio is >0.8 but <2, lateral E/e0ratio > 13, LA maximum volume index > 34 mL/m2, and LARS < 18%
favor the diagnosis of postcapillary PH.
6. Mitral stenosis521. IVRT < 60 ms *
2. Mitral A peak velocity > 1.5 m/s
3. IVRT/T E-e0ratio < 4.2
7. MR52-541. IVRT < 60 ms *
2. Ar-A ( $30 ms)
3. IVRT/T E-e0ratio < 5.6
4. Average E/e0ratio > 14 in patients with depressed EF
8. Moderate/severe
MAC551. LV ﬁlling pressure normal when mitral E/A ratio is <0.8
2. LV ﬁlling pressure elevated when mitral E/A ratio is >1.83. E/A ratio >0.8 but <1.8, IVRT should be measured. LV ﬁlling pressure normal when IVRT is $80 ms, whereas it is
elevated if IVRT <80 ms.
9. LV assist device56,571. E/A ratio > 2
2. RAP > 10 mm Hg
3. PASP > 40 mm Hg
4. Average E/e0ratio > 14 or septal E/e0ratio$15
5. LA maximum volume index > 33 mL/m2
6. Interatrial septum position†
10. Cardiac transplant
recipients581. Average E/e0ratio < 7 denotes normal LV ﬁlling pressures
2. Average E/e0ratio > 14 denotes elevated LV ﬁlling pressures
3. For E/e0ratio > 7 and <14, SR IVR, from all three apical views, is measured, and the ratio of mitral E velocity to SR IVR
is derived. A ratio #200 cm is consistent with normal LV ﬁlling pressure, but >200 cm denotes elevated LV ﬁlling
pressure.
4. In patients in whom SR IVRcannot be measured, peak TR velocity is relied on. Peak TR velocity #2.8 m/s is
consistent with normal LV ﬁlling pressures, but >2.8 m/s denotes elevated LV ﬁlling pressures.
*Speciﬁc but not sensitive indicators of elevated LV ﬁlling pressure.
†LAP = RAP if the interatrial septum position is neutral. If septum bulges to right, then LAP is 5 mm Hg higher than RAP. If septum bulges to left, then
LAP is 5 mm Hg lower than RAP.Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 557
delayed such that it occurs at the second LA-L V pressure crossover point. In
comparison, mitral E velocity occurs earlier with elevated LAP. Thus, T E-e0is
prolonged and can correct for the effect of L V relaxation on IVRT. IVRT/T E-
e0correlates well (inversely) with mean PCWP and LAP in patients with
mitral stenosis.1,52However, E/e0ratio is not useful.
b. MR: Primary MR leads to LA and LV enlargement and an increase in the
compliance of both chambers, which attenuates the increase in LAP. Later,
with increased LA stiffness, mean LAP and PA pressures increase, which is
related to MR, not LV myocardial disease. However, with LV diastolicdysfunction, the increased LV diastolic pressures contribute to the increase
in LAP. The sequence is opposite to that seen in primary myocardial dis-
ease such as dilated cardiomyopathy, which leads to increased LV diastolicpressures initially and later to functional MR. Therefore, in patients withsecondary MR, echocardiographic correlates of increased ﬁlling pressures
reﬂect the combination of both myocardial and valvular disorders. Moder-
ate and severe MR usually lead to an increase in mitral E velocity and adecrease in pulmonary vein systolic velocity, and the S-to-D ratio. In severeMR, systolic pulmonary venous ﬂow reversal can be seen. Thus, MR can
induce changes in transmitral and pulmonary venous ﬂow patterns resem-
bling advanced L V diastolic dysfunction. Irrespective of MR severity, Ar-Aduration remains a good indicator of increased LVEDP.
53A continuous-
wave (CW) Doppler MR velocity proﬁle showing early peaking and
reduced late LV-LAP gradient is a highly speciﬁc, though not sensitive,
sign of increased LAP. The utility of E/e0ratio in predicting L V ﬁlling pres-
sures in the setting of moderate or severe MR is more complex. In patients
with depressed EF, an increased E/e0ratio has a direct signiﬁcant relation
with LAP and predicts hospitalizations and mortality.54However, E/e0ra-
tio does not appear to be useful in patients with primary MR and normalEF,
59though some investigators have noted a good correlation between E/
e0ratio and mean PCWP as well as PASP in this population. Likewise,
LARS has been shown to have no signiﬁcant relationship with LA ‘‘v’’wave or mean pressure in patients with signiﬁcant MR and could notdetect changes in ‘‘v’’ pressure after transcatheter edge-to-edge repair
(TEER).
60In comparison, IVRT/T E-e0ratio correlates reasonably well
with mean PCWP, regardless of EF. An IVRT/T E-e0ratio <3 readily predicts
PCWP > 15 mm Hg in this patient population.52In patients with atrial
ﬁbrillation and MR, the use of matched intervals (necessitating acquisition
of many cycles) is necessary. It is challenging to assess LV relaxation and L Vﬁlling pressures after mitral valve repair or replacement, although time in-tervals and PA pressures could be of value for drawing inferences about L V
ﬁlling pressures.
52
c. Mitral annular calciﬁcation (MAC): MAC frequently accompanies hyper-
tensive heart disease, aortic sclerosis, coronary artery disease, and chronickidney disease and is prevalent in elderly patients. In patients with moderate
to severe MAC, mitral oriﬁce area is decreased, leading to increased dia-
stolic transmitral velocities, while lateral e
0velocity may be decreased
because of reduced annular excursion. Thus, an increase in E/e0ratio can
occur because of the mechanical effects of MAC. Although data are limited,
L V ﬁlling pressures are usually normal when mitral E/A ratio is <0.8 but
elevated when the ratio is >1.8. When E/A is 0.8 to 1.8, IVRT should bemeasured ( Figure 4 ). L V ﬁlling pressure is usually normal when IVRT is
$80 ms, whereas it is elevated if IVRT is <80 ms.
55d. LAP estimation after TEER: Flow across an iatrogenic atrial septal
defect after TEER can be detected from multiple views using colorDoppler. When ﬂow is aligned with the ultrasound beam (usually
from the subcostal view), CW Doppler can be used to record the
peak ﬂow velocity across the interatrial septum in late diastole in pa-tients in sinus rhythm, corresponding to the LA ‘‘a’’ wave, and thepeak velocity at end-systole corresponding to the LA ‘‘v’’ wave. The
modiﬁed Bernoulli equation is then used to estimate the corresponding
LAP as follows:
LAP (mm Hg) = 4 V2+ RAP,
where Vis the peak velocity of ﬂow across the interatrial septum in
meters per second. RAP is estimated on the basis of inferior vena cavadiameter, its change with respiration and snifﬁng, and hepatic vein
ﬂow.
1When interatrial left-to-right shunt velocity is >1.7 m/s, LAP
is usually elevated. However, in patients with biventricular HF, the in-teratrial velocity may not be helpful in estimating LAP. The aforemen-
tioned approach can also be applied in other situations with residual
shunt across the interatrial septum after ablation procedures for atrialﬁbrillation, LA appendage occlusion, other procedures involvingtransseptal access, and also congenital atrial septal defects.
e. Aortic stenosis and aortic regurgitation: The presence of diastolic dysfunc-
tion, including elevated L V ﬁlling pressures, predicts worse outcomes in pa-tients with moderate or severe aortic stenosis (AS).
61Furthermore, the
improvement of diastolic dysfunction after surgical and transcatheter aortic
valve replacement is associated with lower rates of adverse outcomeevents.
62,63It is therefore recommended that assessment of L V diastolic
function status be carried out in all patients with AS and be included in
the report. There are usually no major challenges to the application of theguidelines in patients with AS. If moderate or severe MAC is present,then the recommendations pertaining to patients with signiﬁcant MAC
should be applied.
For patients with severe aortic regurgitation (AR), the AR jet can
interfere with the recording of mitral inﬂow velocities and carefulpositioning of the sample volume is needed to avoid contamination
with the AR jet. In severe acute AR, the presence of abbreviated L V
diastolic ﬁlling period, premature closure of the mitral valve, and dia-stolic MR indicate elevated L V ﬁlling pressures. In chronic severe AR,
the mitral inﬂow pattern often shows predominant early diastolic
ﬁlling with short deceleration time of mitral E velocity,
64but there
are limited data on the accuracy of estimation of L V ﬁlling pressuresin patients with chronic severe AR. In patients with AR, the presence
of LA enlargement, average E/e
0> 14, LARS < 18%, and peak TR
velocity > 2.8 m/s support the presence of increased L V ﬁllingpressures.
Mitral E/A RaƟo 
<0.8 0.8-1.8 >1.8
Normal LA pressure Elevated  LA pressureIVRT
<80 ms ≥80 ms
Figure 4 Algorithm for estimation of mean LAP in patients with
moderate or severe MAC.Key Points
1. Mitral stenosis renders assessment of L V diastolic function more
challenging, but IVRT, T E-e0, and mitral E and A velocities can be
of value in the semiquantitative prediction of mean LAP.
2. Ar-A duration > 30 ms and IVRT/T E-e0< 5.6 may be applied
for prediction of L V ﬁlling pressures in patients with MR andnormal L VEF, whereas E/e
0ratio may be considered only in pa-
tients with MR and depressed EF.
3. In patients with moderate and severe MAC, L V ﬁlling pressures
are usually normal when mitral E/A ratio is <0.8 but elevated
when the ratio is >1.8. When E/A is 0.8 to 1.8, IVRTshould be
measured. L V ﬁlling pressure is usually normal when IVRT is$80 ms, whereas it is elevated if IVRT <80 ms.558 Nagueh et al
Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
B. Heart Transplant Recipients
The transplanted heart is affected by many factors that inﬂuence L V
diastolic function, making the interpretation of diastolic function
more difﬁcult. The donor heart is denervated, leading to sinus tachy-cardia, which can lead to fusion of mitral E and A velocities.Pulmonary venous ﬂow is usually not helpful in estimating L V ﬁlling
pressures as the S-to-D ratio is reduced given the young age of
most donor hearts.
For mitral inﬂow, an E/A ratio $2 in patients with preserved EF is a
common ﬁnding after heart transplantation and can be observed in pa-
tients with normal L V diastolic function as donor hearts are usually ob-tained from healthy individuals. It is most pronounced in the early
weeks after surgery, and in some patients is likely related to myocardial
edema. This inﬂow pattern changes at follow-up. Although L V diastolicpressures can be normal at rest, a large increase in L V minimal pressure
and L VEDP has been noted during exercise in heart transplant recipi-
ents with diastolic dysfunction.
65This is due to lack of shortening or
prolongation of the time constant of L Vrelaxation with exercise in addi-tion to increased L V chamber stiffness.
65Mitral annular e0velocity is
inﬂuenced by the pronounced translational motion of the heart and
may not detect the changes in L V relaxation status with exercise. Ofnote, myocardial tissue velocities are lowest early after surgery and
tend to increase during the following weeks and months, thoughsome studies noted that they were reduced 1 year after transplantation
compared with a normal population. L V diastolic dysfunction has oftenbeen described as a sensitive sign of early graft rejection as myocardialedema causes increased diastolic stiffness and ﬁlling pressures in the
presence of a normal EF.
1Later, myocardial ﬁbrosis seen with chronic
graft rejection can lead to a restrictive L V ﬁlling pattern and markedlyreduced annular velocities. However, no single diastolic parameter is
reliable enough to predict graft rejection.
A recently validated simpliﬁed approach may be used in transplant
recipient patients in sinus rhythm, whereby average E/e
0< 7 denotes
normal L V ﬁlling pressures, and E/e0> 14 denotes elevated L V ﬁlling
pressures.58For average E/e0between 7 and 14, L V strain rate during
the isovolumic relaxation period (SR IVR), from all 3 apical views, is
measured, and the ratio of mitral E velocity to SR IVRis derived. A ratio
#200 cm is consistent with normal L V ﬁlling pressures, but >200 cm
denotes elevated L V ﬁlling pressures ( Figure 5 ). In patients in whom
SRIVRcannot be measured, peak TR velocity is used. A peak TR ve-
locity#2.8 m/s is consistent with normal L V ﬁlling pressures, but
>2.8 m/s denotes elevated L V ﬁlling pressures.58
Figure 5 Algorithm for estimation of mean LAP in heart transplant recipients in sinus rhythm.4. The guidelines in patients without valvular heart disease can be
applied to patients with AS, irrespective of severity of valvular
stenosis. This excludes patients with moderate or severe MAC.
5. Flow across atrial septal defect (congenital or iatrogenic after
TEER and other procedures) can be recorded by CW Doppler.The modiﬁed Bernoulli equation is used to estimate the corre-sponding LAP as LAP (mm Hg) = 4 V
2+R A P ,w h e r e Vis the
peak velocity of ﬂow across the interatrial septum in metersper second.
6. In patients with acute or chronic severe AR, premature closure
of the mitral valve, diastolic MR, LA enlargement, average E/e
0> 14, and TR peak velocity > 2.8 m/s are consistent with
elevated L V ﬁlling pressures.
Key Points
1. Predominant early diastolic ﬁlling in patients with preserved EF
is a common ﬁnding after heart transplantation and is observedin patients with normal L V diastolic function as donor heartsare usually obtained from healthy individuals.
2. No single diastolic parameter is reliable enough to predict graft
rejection.
3. A simpliﬁed approach may be used whereby average E/e
0<7
denotes normal L V ﬁlling pressures, but E/e0> 14 supports the
conclusion of elevated L V ﬁlling pressures. For E/e0between 7
and 14, SR IVR, from all three apical views, is measured, and the
ratio of mitral E velocity to SR IVRis derived. A ratio #200 cm
is consistent with normal L V ﬁlling pressures, but >200 cm de-notes elevated L V ﬁlling pressures. In patients in whom SR
IVR
cannot be measured, peak TR velocity is used. A peak TR ve-
locity#2.8 m/s is consistent with normal L V ﬁlling pressures,
but >2.8 m/s denotes elevated L V ﬁlling pressures.Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 559
C. Pulmonary Hypertension
Evaluation of L V ﬁlling pressure in patients with moderate or severe
pulmonary hypertension (PH) group I and groups III to V requires adifferent approach than in patients with PH due to left-sided heart dis-
ease or group II PH.
1Because PH is associated with elevated right ven-
tricular (RV) systolic and diastolic pressures, there is often septalﬂattening, and therefore lateral E/e
0rather than the average of septal
and lateral E/e0should be used to evaluate L V ﬁlling pressure. In pa-
tients with PH, lateral E/e0> 13 reﬂects elevated L V ﬁlling pressure,
and values <8 are consistent with normal ﬁlling pressure.50In a recent
study looking at noninvasive evaluation of L V ﬁlling pressure in PH,
these observations were conﬁrmed, and it was observed that E/e0in
the range of 8 to 13 had weak or no association with L V ﬁlling pres-sure.
51Therefore, the use of lateral E/e0as a marker of L V ﬁlling pres-
sure can result in indeterminate cases. However, the combination of
lateral E/e0with either mitral E/A ratio or LARS (<16%) readily iden-
tiﬁed patients with elevated PCWP with good accuracy and high feasi-
bility ( Figure 6 ).
D. AV Block, Bundle Branch Block, and Electronic Pacing
Normal subjects have near simultaneous contraction and relaxation
of all ventricular segments, which is demonstrated as synchronous sys-tolic shortening and diastolic lengthening as seen with strain imaging.Abnormalities of the cardiac conduction system due to disease, aging,
drugs, or pacing can adversely affect AV synchrony and synchronousL V contraction and relaxation, which may reduce functional capacityby altering L V systolic and diastolic function, and thus the variables
used to assess diastolic function. If the PR interval is too short, atrial
ﬁlling is terminated early by ventricular contraction, thus reducingmitral A duration, L V end-diastolic volume, and cardiac output. A
ﬁrst-degree AV block of 200 to 280 ms is usually well tolerated if
L VEF and heart rate are normal. However, in patients with shorteneddiastolic ﬁlling periods due to markedly impaired L V relaxation, faster
heart rates, bundle branch block, or ventricular pacing, a ﬁrst-degree
AV block of >280 ms usually results in fusion of E and A velocities.If atrial contraction occurs before early diastolic mitral ﬂow velocityhas decreased toward zero (deﬁned as #20 cm/s), E/A is reduced
because of a higher A-wave velocity.
66This fusion of early and late
diastolic ﬁlling waves with an E/A <1 can be misinterpreted asimpaired relaxation ﬁlling pattern. In addition, with mitral E and A
fusion, the larger atrial stroke volume increases the mitral A-wave
duration. Diastolic fusion of ﬁlling waves can limit exercise capacitybecause L V end-diastolic volume is reduced, lowering maximal car-
diac output. At PR values >320 ms, E and A velocity fusion leads
to ﬁlling only with atrial contraction (uniphasic A velocity), and dia-stolic MR is seen.
67In these patients, maximal exercise capacity is
almost always limited because of the inability to increase L V ﬁlling
with increasing heart rate. If there is complete fusion, peak TR velocityand LA volume and strain can be used to draw inferences about L Vﬁlling pressures. Albeit the accuracy of LARS has not been critically
examined in this setting.
Right bundle branch block results in delayed activation of the RV
myocardium as electrical depolarization must spread through myo-
cytes instead of the specialized conduction system. Although minor
changes in L V and RV synchrony are observed, no studies haveconvincingly shown that this leads to clinically meaningful changes
in L V diastolic variables or exercise capacity. This is also true of left
anterior or right posterior hemiblock. In contrast, left bundle branchblock (LBBB) can be associated with prolongation of IVRT, which
leads to shortening of L V ﬁlling time,
68,69which in turn limits stroke
volume. This can be a challenge during exercise when the rapid heartrate further reduces diastolic ﬁlling time. LBBB can be associated withKey Points
1. Reliable variables for estimation of L V ﬁlling pressure in pa-
tients with PH include lateral E/e0, mitral E/A, LAVi, and LARS.
2. An E/A value #0.8 is usually seen in patients with noncardiac
PH, whereas a ratio $2 is seen in patients with group II PH.
3. LAVi > 34 ml/m2, lateral E/e0> 13, and LARS < 18% favor the
presence of group II PH.
4. The recommended algorithm in patients with PH begins with
mitral E/A, where a ratio #0.8 favors the diagnosis of precapil-
lary PH, and a ratio $2 favors the diagnosis of postcapillary
PH. For E/A > 0.8 but <2, lateral E/e0> 13, LAVi > 34 mL/
m2, and LARS #16% favor the diagnosis of group II PH.
Normal LAP Elevated  LAPLAP EsƟmaƟon in PaƟents with Pulmonary Hypertension
E/A ≤0.8, and 
E ≤ 50 cm/sE/A ≤0.8, and E > 50 cm/s or
E/A >0.8 to <2E/A≥2, and 
e’ is reduced
LARS
LARS >18% LARS ≤18%
LARS  not available
Lateral E/e’ raƟo
E/e’ <8E/e’>13
LAP indeterminate for raƟo >8 and <13
Figure 6 Algorithm for estimation of mean LAP in patients with PH.560 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
abnormal function of the interventricular septum leading to a reduc-
tion in septal e0velocity. Therefore, septal and average E/e0may not
reﬂect L V ﬁlling pressure reliably in patients with LBBB. Lateral E/e0
may still be a valid indicator of ﬁlling pressure. There is a need for
further studies to determine how lateral E/e0may be used in patients
with L V dyssynchrony caused by LBBB, RV pacing, and in patientswith cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT).
RV pacing often leads to L V mechanical dyssynchrony resembling
the contraction pattern in LBBB. Therefore, RV pacing can impair L Vﬁlling and limits utility of septal e
0as a marker of diastolic dysfunction.
Patients who mostly need atrial pacing have no alterations in L V sys-
tolic and diastolic function. In patients who are not dependent on ven-tricular pacing to maintain heart rate, pacemaker settings are often setwith a long AV delay to encourage fusion or native QRS beats to mini-
mize RV pacing. There are few studies that have looked at the utility
of mitral annular velocities in this setting and it appears that their ac-curacy is less in the presence of LBBB, RV pacing, and in patients who
have received CRT.
21,70
E. Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
Restrictive cardiomyopathies are composed of a heterogeneous
group of heart muscle diseases including but not limited to such dis-
eases as idiopathic restrictive cardiomyopathy, cardiac amyloidosis,
and sarcoidosis. These diseases are often characterized by restrictivepathophysiology, which is deﬁned as a rapid rise in diastolic ventricu-
lar pressure with only a small increase in L V volume due to increased
myocardial stiffness.
71It is important to make the distinction between
restrictive L V ﬁlling, which can occur with other diseases such as cor-onary artery disease, dilated cardiomyopathy, and hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy (HCM), and restrictive cardiomyopathy.
A common restrictive cardiomyopathy is cardiac amyloidosis, an
inﬁltrative cardiomyopathy most commonly caused by either immu-
noglobulin light chain deposition or by misfolding in the hepatic-
derived transthyretin (TTR) protein into amyloid ﬁbrils. In the earlierstages of cardiac amyloidosis, diastolic function can vary from grade
1 diastolic dysfunction with impaired relaxation and normal L V
ﬁlling pressures to grade 2 (pseudonormalization). In later stages,grade 3 diastolic dysfunction occurs with markedly elevated L V
ﬁlling pressures.
46In contemporary diagnostic approaches, there
has been an evolution of the diastolic function techniques appliedin studying these patients, initially using mitral inﬂow and pulmo-nary vein ﬂow, to TDI of the mitral annulus and now STE imaging,
including L V GLS, LA strain, and RV strain.
47The advanced stages of
restrictive cardiomyopathy are characterized by typical restrictivephysiology with a dip-and-plateau pattern for early diastolic L Vpressure changes with time, mitral inﬂow E/A > 2.5, deceleration
time of E velocity < 150 ms, IVRT < 50 ms,
48,49decreased septal
and lateral e0velocities (3-4 cm/s), decr eased GLS with preserved
radial and circumferential strain,72and reduced LA strain.47In
advanced cardiac amyloidosis, mitral annular velocity tracings may
show the ‘‘5-5-5’’ sign with systolic, early diastolic, and late diastolicvelocities all <5 cm/s.
47Grade 3 diastolic dysfunction is associated
with a poor outcome.73For cardiac amyloidosis (TTR or light chain
type), there are ‘‘red ﬂags’’ suggestive of cardiac involvement, such asincreased L V and RV wall thickness, biatrial enlargement, preserved
EF with low stroke volume index, an association with paradoxical
low-ﬂow, low-gradient AS, and diastolic dysfunction (E/A ratio > 2with increased ﬁlling pressures and markedly reduced annular veloc-ities.
22In addition, speckle-tracking of the LV myocardium in pa-
tients with cardiac amyloidosis has shown a distinctive phenotype
of apical sparing using a polar plot of L V longitudinal straincompared with hypertensive heart disease, HCM, and AS.
74There
have been several ratios to evaluate apical sparing, including a ratio
of apical strain to mid and basal strain (>1),74the septal apical-to-
basal ratio using the four-chamber septal apical and basal segmental
longitudinal strain values with a value >2.1,75as well as EF/strain ra-
tio >4.1.76
F. Pericardial Constriction
Pericardial constriction is characterized by dissociation of intratho-
racic and intracardiac pressures as well as interventricular depen-dence due to the effect of the constricting pericardium on the L V
and the RV. This results in respirophasic shift of the ventricular
septum, septal bounce, mitral and tricuspid inﬂow variation withrespiration (>25% and 40%, respectively), and expiratory reversal
of end-diastolic ﬂow within the hepatic veins (end-diastolic reversal
velocity/forward ﬂow velocity $0.8).
77,78In addition, mitral septal
e0velocity is often >7 cm/s, whereas it is usually #5 cm/s in restric-
tive cardiomyopathy. T ethering of the L V lateral and RV free walls
contributes to the constrictive physiology and is demonstrated byan increased ratio of mitral septal to lateral e
0(annulus reversus).79
Similarly, the lateral L Vand RV free wall peak systolic strain is dimin-
ished compared with the septal peak systolic strain (strain rever-
sus).80Figure 7 shows a validated algorithm based on data from
the Mayo Clinic comparing pericardial constriction with restrictive
cardiomyopathy.78,81This algorithm was corroborated in a similar
study.82The presence of a normal septal (or medial) annular e0ve-
locity in a patient referred with HF diagnosis should raise suspicion
of pericardial constriction.Key Points
1. In patients with ﬁrst-degree AV block, the variables used to
evaluate diastolic function and ﬁlling pressures are valid if there
is no fusion of mitral E and A velocities.
2. The accuracy of mitral annular velocities and E/e0is less in the
presence of LBBB, RV pacing, and in patients who havereceived CRT.
3. If only mitral A velocity is present, peak TR velocity (>2.8 m/s)
can be used as an indicator of L V ﬁlling pressures. The accuracyof LARS in this setting has not been examined.
Key Points
1. Patients with early disease restrictive cardiomyopathy usually
have grade 1 diastolic dysfunction that progresses to grade 2and grade 3 as the severity of the disease increases.
2. In patients with advanced disease, grade 3 diastolic dysfunc-
tion is present and is characterized by mitral inﬂow E/A > 2.5, deceleration time of E velocity < 150 ms,
IVRT < 50 ms, and decreased septal and lateral e
0velocities
(3-4 cm/s), as well as decreased L V GLS, RV strain, and LAreservoir and pump strain.
3. Strain imaging of the L V myocardium in patients with cardiac
amyloidosis can have a distinctive phenotype of apical sparing.Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 561
G. HCM
Impaired L V relaxation is an early ﬁnding in subjects carrying patho-
genic mutations for HCM that occurs before the development ofL V hypertrophy.
45Furthermore, diastolic dysfunction is a ubiquitous
ﬁnding in HCM patients irrespective of the hypertrophy pattern and
contributes to their symptoms even in the absence of dynamicobstruction.
45The Doppler variables that are recommended are
mitral inﬂow velocities, pulmonary vein velocities, mitral annular ve-
locities, peak TR velocity by CW Doppler, and biplane LA volumes.Signiﬁcant MR can lead to elevated LAP, LA volumes, and peak TR
velocity with a decrease in the pulmonary vein systolic to diastolicvelocity ratio. However, MR does not affect pulmonary vein Ar veloc-
ity. Ar peak velocity and duration can be used to draw inferencesabout L VEDP in the absence of atrial myopathy and ﬁrst-degree AVblock.
45,53In addition, LA reservoir and pump strains in patients
with HCM have been associated with functional capacity and devel-
opment of atrial ﬁbrillation, though there is need to study their speciﬁcapplication for LAP estimation. A restrictive L V ﬁlling pattern with
increased E/e
0is associated with HF hospitalizations, reduced exercise
tolerance in children and adults, and sudden cardiac death.454. Patients with pericardial constriction usually have respirophasic
shift of the interventricular septum, septal bounce, mitral and
tricuspid inﬂow variation with respiration (>25% and 40%,respectively), normal to increased medial annular early diastolicvelocity (>7 cm/s), increased expiratory reversal of end-diastolicﬂow within the hepatic veins (end-diastolic reversal velocity/for-ward ﬂow velocity $0.8), as well as annulus and strain reversus.
Figure 7 (A) Algorithm for differentiation of pericardial constriction from restrictive cardiomyopathy. ( B) Sensitivity, speciﬁcity and
predictive values of the algorithm. Reprinted with permission from Klein et al.78NPV, Negative predictive value; PPV, positive predic-
tive value.Key Points
1. A comprehensive approach is recommended for the evalua-
tion of diastolic function in patients with HCM.
2. The Doppler variables that are recommended are mitral inﬂow
velocities, pulmonary vein velocities, mitral annular velocities,peak TR velocity by CW Doppler, and biplane LA volumes.
3. Restrictive L V ﬁlling with increased E/e
0is associated with
reduced functional capacity and HF hospitalizations in patientswith HCM.562 Nagueh et al
Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
H. Atrial Fibrillation
Atrial ﬁbrillation is a common ﬁnding in patients with diastolic dysfunc-
tion and HFpEF. Atrial ﬁbrillation poses several challenges due to tachy-cardia in some cases, the absence of organized atrial contraction, the
variability in cycle length, and the frequent presence of LA enlargement.
Several echocardiographic parameters have been suggested as markersof L V ﬁlling pressure in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation and smaller single-
center studies have shown promising results.
40,41,83In a recent multi-
center study, it was found that no single echocardiographic parameterhad sufﬁciently strong association with L V ﬁlling pressure to be recom-
mended as a stand-alone marker. When using a multiparametric
approach, the accuracy in differentiating between normal and elevatedL V ﬁlling pressure was moderate ( Figure 8 ).
42
When assessing L V ﬁlling pressure in atrial ﬁbrillation, one should use
average values from several cardiac cycles, and the selected heart cycles
should be reﬂective of the average heart rate.40For E/e0and ratios that
rely on timing of mitral E onset and e0velocity onset, the use of a dual
Doppler probe can enable the recording of both velocities from the
same cardiac cycle, with a much higher accuracy for estimation ofPCWP than averaging velocities or time intervals from several cardiac
cycles.
84,85Looking at variability of mitral inﬂow with varying cycle
length is a practical method to determine whether L V ﬁlling pressureis elevated. This necessitates recording several cardiac cycles with asweep speed of 50 mm/s. Patients with less beat-to-beat mitral inﬂow
variability usually have elevated L V ﬁlling pressure.
4016. HFPEF DIAGNOSIS
HFpEF constitutes half of all HF hospitalizations, with a growing prev-
alence relative to HF with reduced EF.86-88This is multifactorial
because of an aging population with an increasing burden ofcomorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, obesity—
predominantly metabolic syndrome–associated comorbidities—that
contribute to the development of HFpEF.
89The guidelines present
a stepwise guide to the diagnosis of HFpEF, including clinical diag-
nosis, and guide for noninvasive and invasive testing ( Figure 9 ).
A. Clinical Diagnosis of HFpEF
The clinical diagnosis of HFpEF is reached by establishing the pres-
ence of signs and symptoms of congestive HF as well as an echocar-
diographic determination of normal L VEF (generally accepted to be$50%) in the absence of other cardiac or noncardiac causes for the
patient’s symptoms. The American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association/Heart Failure Society of America andEuropean Society of Cardiology (ESC) each provide deﬁnitions ofHFpEF and suggested diagnostic evaluation
22,90-92(Table 8 ).
The recognition of the clinical HF syndrome is the ﬁrst step in diag-
nosing HFpEF. Several criteria have been proposed to diagnose HFincluding the Framingham, Boston, Gothenburg, and ESC
criteria.
93-95The Framingham criteria are among the most widely
accepted criteria for diagnosis of HF in epidemiologic studies.Although the Framingham criteria demonstrate excellent speciﬁcity
for the diagnosis of HF, they lack sensitivity, particularly in elderly
patients who may have not had acute HF decompensation.
96,97
Therefore, a patient may have HFpEF even in the absence of satisfying
speciﬁc clinical criteria for HF.
Early presenting symptoms of HFpEF may be relatively nonspe-
ciﬁc, including exertional dyspnea, exercise intolerance, or fatigue.Clinical suspicion should be further raised if a patient presenting
with these symptoms has one or more risk factors commonly associ-
ated with HFpEF. The most commonly associated comorbidities withHFpEF that may raise pretest probability of the diagnosis include the
history of hypertension, elderly age (>60 years), obesity (body mass
index > 30 kg/m
2), history of diabetes mellitus, or history of atrial
ﬁbrillation.8,98Key Points
1. In patients with atrial ﬁbrillation, several echocardiographic pa-
rameters are associated with LAP, but no single parameter has
a strong association.
2. A decision algorithm that combines multiple echocardio-
graphic parameters can differentiate between normal andelevated L V ﬁlling pressure with moderate accuracy.
3. One should use average values from several cardiac cycles and
the selected heart cycles should be reﬂective of the averageheart rate.
3 or more of above
Normal LAPElevated  LAPLARS <18%
Pulm vein S/D ratio <1
BMI > 30 kg/m2LAP Estimation in Atrial Fibrillation 
None or 1 of above1. Mitral E velocity ≥ 100 cm/s
2. Septal E/e’ ratio > 11
3. TR velocity > 2.8 m/s or PASP > 35 mm Hg
4. DT ≤160 ms
2/3 or 3/3 None
Indeterminate 2 of above
1 only or not available or 
not reliable 
Figure 8 Algorithm for estimation of mean LAP with atrial ﬁbrillation. BMI, Body mass index; Pulm , pulmonary.Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 563
Physical examination may demonstrate signs of congestion,
including elevated jugular venous pressure, presence of an S3 gallop,pulmonary crackles or rales, hepatomegaly, ascites, or lower extrem-
ity edema. Electrocardiography should be performed in all patients
with suspected HFpEF. Although there are no pathognomonic ordiagnostic signs to identify HFpEF on electrocardiography per se, pa-
tients may have features of L V hypertrophy or LA enlargement.
Furthermore, electrocardiographic evaluation can screen for atrialﬁbrillation, which may be occult in HFpEF and is prevalent in 15%
to 41% of patients.
99,100Last, chest radiography should be performed
in the evaluation of HFpEF, particularly in patients presenting with
dyspnea. Chest radiography may show signs of volume overload
(Kerley B-lines, pleural effusion, pulmonary congestion) or revealother noncardiac causes of dyspnea. Radiographic ﬁndings appear
to have low sensitivity in detecting patients with HFpEF compared
with PCWP measurements by cardiac catheterization.
101History and Physical Examination, 
Chest X-Ray, Labs, Natriuretic peptides
Comprehensive Echocardiogram
•Exclude Significant MS, primary MR, 
AS, AR, primary TR
* Exclude significant CAD, non-cardiac PH
*  Exclude cardiac amyloidosis, HCM
* Exclude pericardial constriction 
Algorithm  for LAP estimation 
(figure 3)
LAP elevatedDyspnea with LAP 
normal by rest echo
Diastolic Exercise echo or  
RHC with/without exercise 
HFpEF confirmed
Non cardiac dyspneaPositive test 
Negative test Exclude non-cardiac
causes
for dyspnea
Figure 9 Algorithm for HFpEF diagnosis. *Multimodality imaging and cardiac catheterization should be used as needed to establish
the presence of alternative diagnoses to HFpEF. CAD , Coronary artery disease; MS, mitral stenosis; RHC , right heart catheterization.
Table 8 Consensus deﬁnitions of HFpEF
ACC/AHA/HFSA ESC
Deﬁnition of
HFpEFEF$50% and:
/C15Clinical symptoms and/or signs of HF and
/C15Diastolic dysfunctionEF$50% and:
/C15Clinical symptoms and/or signs of HF and
/C15Elevated NP levels andat least one of the following:
◦Relevant structural heart disease (LVH and/or LAE)
◦Diastolic dysfunction
Clinical signs /C15Obtain detailed history and physical
examination
/C15Assess volume status and vital signs to
determine evidence of congestion/C15Obtain detailed history and physical
/C15Assess symptoms and signs of HF for evidence of congestion
NPs /C15Can guide the diagnosis of HF, especially in
the setting of clinical uncertainty/C15Can guide the diagnosis or exclusion of HF
/C15Normal levels exclude HF
Echocardiography /C15EF measurement and assessment of valvular
or myocardial abnormalities
/C15Evidence of LV diastolic dysfunction may be
considered to deﬁne the syndrome of HFpEF/C15Evaluate for evidence of functional or structural abnormalities
/C15Key structural abnormalities:
◦LAVi > 34 mL/m2
◦LVMi$115 g/m2for men and $95 g/m2for women
/C15Key functional abnormalities:
◦E/e0$13
◦Mean e0(mean of septal and lateral e0) < 9 cm/s
Invasive testing /C15RHC if refractory to initial therapy or if a
speciﬁc clinical question needs to be
addressed
/C15LHC is recommended if HF and angina
present/C15RHC at rest followed by exercise hemodynamics if below the threshold of
PCWP 15 mm Hg, may be considered in cases of clinical uncertainty
ACC , American College of Cardiology; AHA, American Heart Association; ESC, European Society of Cardiology; HFSA , Heart Failure Society of
America; LAE, LA enlargement; LHC, left heart catheterization; LVH, LV hypertrophy; LVMi , LV mass index; RHC , right heart catheterization.564 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
B. Echocardiographic Imaging
Once the clinical diagnosis of HFpEF is suspected in the appropriate
clinical setting, physical examination ﬁndings, and/or the presence of
risk factors, the next step in the diagnostic evaluation of HFpEF should
be imaging. Echocardiography is the most common initial imaging mo-dality in the evaluation of HFpEF, providing information on structuralchanges and hemodynamic parameters that may support a diagnosis
of HFpEF, while also useful for the evaluation of other cardiac causes
of dyspnea, such as valvular disease, inﬁltrative cardiomyopathy, orpericardial disease. Though different EF cutoff points have been pro-
posed for the diagnosis of HFpEF, an L VEF of $50% is accepted as
normal or preserved and is consistent with a diagnosis of HFpEF.
8
Patients with HFpEF often have morphologic and functional ab-
normalities on the echocardiogram (e.g., L V hypertrophy, concentric
remodeling, LA enlargement, diastolic dysfunction, reduced L V GLS,reduced LARS), though by themselves these ﬁndings are not diag-
nostic of HFpEF. Diastolic function is assessed as recommended in
the previous sections (see algorithms in Figures 2 and3). A compre-
hensive echocardiographic examination with measurement of theseparameters should be performed in the initial diagnostic evaluation
of a patient with suspected HFpEF. If the resting echocardiogram
shows increased L V ﬁlling pressure (grade 2 or 3 diastolic dysfunc-tion), the diagnosis of HFpEF is conﬁrmed in the appropriate clinical
setting. However, if only diastolic function grade 1 is present at rest in
a patient with exertional dyspnea, diastolic exercise echocardiogra-phy or cardiac catheterization should be performed (see the following
discussion). For patients in atrial ﬁbrillation, the speciﬁc recommenda-tions for estimation of L V ﬁlling pressures for these groups should be
followed.
Although echocardiography remains at the cornerstone of HF eval-
uation, CMR is a robust imaging modality to characterize myocardial
tissue abnormalities.
15CMR can be considered in the workup of pa-
tients with HFpEF, particularly if echocardiographic imaging quality issuboptimal or if there are concerns for an inﬁltrative myopathic pro-
cess such as amyloidosis.
C. Natriuretic Peptides
Levels of natriuretic peptides (NPs), including brain NP and N-termi-
nal pro–B-type NP, should be checked in patients presenting with sus-pected HFpEF or undifferentiated dyspnea.
102NP levels are generally
higher in patients with HFpEF compared with subjects without HF
and have useful prognostic implications.102Of note, NP levels are
known to be lower in patients with HFpEF compared with thosewith HF with reduced EF, and obesity, a common comorbidity asso-
ciated with HFpEF, is well known to be associated with lower NP
levels.
103Prior studies have indicated that up to 30% of patients
with HFpEF can have normal NP levels despite signs and symptoms
of HF, echocardiographic abnormalities, and elevated L V ﬁlling pres-
sures on invasive hemodynamic testing.104Therefore, although
important in the evaluation of HFpEF, a normal NP level does not
necessarily rule out a diagnosis of HFpEF, particularly in obese pa-
tients with HFpEF.
D. Role of HFpEF Prediction Scores
For patients with an uncertain probability of HFpEF, a few scoring
systems have been developed to aid in predicting the likelihood ofthe disease. Reddy et al.
98developed the H 2FPEF score by retrospec-
tively comparing clinical ﬁndings in 414 patients referred for evalu-
ation of unexplained dyspnea who underwent invasivehemodynamic exercise testing. The H
2FPEF score is a weighted
score ranging from 0 to 9 and based on six clinical variables: heavy
(body mass index >30 kg/m2, 2 points), hypertensive (two or more
antihypertensive medications, 1 point), atrial ﬁbrillation (paroxysmal
or persistent, 3 points), PH (Doppler echocardiographic estimated
PASP > 35 mm Hg, 1 point), elder (age > 60 years, 1 point), andﬁlling pressure (septal E/e
0> 9, 1 point). A score of 0 to 2 is indicates
a low probability of HFpEF. An intermediate score of 2 to 5 is corre-
lated with a 40% to 80% likelihood of HFpEF, whereas a score >5
indicates high HFpEF probability. Although the H 2FPEF score was
formulated on the basis of a relatively small referral population, it
has been validated in a test cohort and showed good discrimination
of HFpEF from noncardiac dyspnea.98Additionally, the clinical vari-
ables are commonly assessed for, allowing wide applicability in
various clinical settings.
The Heart Failure Association of the ESC also recently published a
consensus recommendation for the diagnosis of HFpEF, the HFA-PEFF diagnostic algorithm.
8The HFA-PEFF algorithm is a stepwise
approach to the diagnosis of HFpEF meant to be performed in the
ambulatory setting. It begins with a pretest probability assessment(signs and symptoms of HF, presence of comorbidities or risk factors,
electrocardiography, echocardiography, NP levels, and functional
testing such as the 6-minute walk test or cardiopulmonary exercisetesting). If pretest assessment is overall suggestive of a HFpEF diag-
nosis, further testing, including comprehensive echocardiography
and NP levels, are used to tabulate a likelihood score. If a diagnosisof HFpEF is intermediate, noninvasive or invasive exercise stressTable 9 Differential diagnosis of HFpEF
Cardiac, myocardial
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Cardiac amyloidosis
Endomyocardial ﬁbrosis
Systemic sclerosisRadiation ﬁbrosis
Hemochromatosis
Fabry diseaseGlycogen storage disease
Metastatic cancer
HCMArrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy
Myocardial ischemia
HF with recovered EFPulmonary arterial hypertension
Cardiac, nonmyocardial
Valvular heart disease (>mild stenosis or $moderate
regurgitation)
Pericardial disease
Constrictive or effusive constrictive pericarditisCardiac tamponade
High-output HF
Noncardiac
Pulmonary disease
Anemia
Venous insufﬁciencyJournal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 565
testing is recommended for further evaluation. The HFA-PEFF diag-
nostic algorithm highlights the importance of a combination ofabnormal structural and functional echocardiographic parameters inthe diagnosis of HFpEF. Although NP levels are incorporated in this al-
gorithm, a diagnosis of HFpEF does not rely only on elevated NP
levels.
These scores may be used in the initial evaluation of patients with
possible HFpEF but conﬁrmation of elevated L V ﬁlling pressures
(noninvasive estimation or invasive measurement) is needed. Inborderline cases with either approach, exercise stress testing should
be pursued to determine if mean PCWP is abnormally increased
with exercise ( $25 mm Hg).
E. Alternative Diagnoses
Certain cardiac and noncardiac conditions that mimic HFpEF should
be ruled out ( Table 9 ). The prevalence of TTR cardiac amyloidosis in
HFpEF is estimated to be 5% to 13%; though this is based on limited
data from autopsy studies and nuclear scan–based screening of pa-
tients with HFpEF.
105,106In the only prospective study using endo-
myocardial biopsy in the evaluation of HFpEF, 14% of patients
were found to have cardiac amyloidosis, the majority being TTR car-
diac amyloidosis.107
F. Exercise and Invasive Hemodynamic Testing
Although many patients with HFpEF present with clear HF syndrome
and echocardiographic ﬁndings consistent with HFpEF, some presentwith little more than dyspnea on exertion and fatigue. These patientsoften require additional testing to further evaluate for a diagnosis of
HFpEF. Exercise stress echocardiography, typically performed with
supine bicycle or treadmill exercise, is the primary modality of nonin-vasive stress testing to evaluate for occult HFpEF. Compared with
invasive hemodynamic testing, exercise echocardiography is less
expensive, with less risk, and may be more accessible. Additionally,exercise stress testing may be useful to assess for concomitant obstruc-
tive coronary artery disease.
Right heart catheterization is considered the gold-standard test to
establish the diagnosis of HFpEF, during which exercise hemody-
namics can often be obtained. PCWP > 15 mm Hg at rest, or
$25 mm Hg with exercise, measured at end-expiration, is consistent
with the diagnosis of HFpEF.
108,109The use of exercise invasive he-
modynamics has been shown to signiﬁcantly increase the diagnostic
yield of HFpEF, particularly for patients presenting at an earlier stage
of the disease.108In patients who are unable to exercise, saline loading
during right heart catheterization can be considered as an alternative
diagnostic modality but has been shown to be less sensitive compared
with exercise in the diagnosis of HFpEF.110
G. Research Needs
A novel method for prediction of L V diastolic pressures using ultra-
sound enhancing agent microbubbles and subharmonic-aided pres-
sure estimation has been reported in a single-center study.111High–
frame rate echocardiography was used to measure shear wave elas-
tography to gain insight into myocardial stiffness.112The clinical feasi-
bility, accuracy, and incremental value of these new techniques awaitevaluation in multicenter studies. There are several AI models for theassessment of L V diastolic function. Validation of these and future
models using invasive hemodynamics and clinical outcomes in multi-
center studies is needed to establish their accuracy and clinicalrelevance. For HFpEF diagnosis, the existing approaches relying onscores have a high yield of an indeterminate category where stress
testing or right heart catheterization is needed. The utility of compre-hensive echocardiography (at rest) in the indeterminate category us-ing LA strain, LA stiffness, pulmonary vein ﬂow, IVRTand PA diastolic
pressure should be evaluated. If successful, it can decrease the need
for additional testing.
NOTICE AND DISCLAIMER
This report is made available by the ASE as a courtesy reference
source for its members. It contains recommendations only and shouldnot be used as the sole basis for making medical practice decisions or
for taking disciplinary action against any employee. The statements
and recommendations contained in this report are based primarilyon the opinions of experts rather than on scientiﬁcally veriﬁed data.
The ASE makes no express or implied warranties regarding the
completeness or accuracy of the information in this report, including
the warranty of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. Inno event shall the ASE be liable to you, your patients, or any other
third parties for any decision made or action taken by you or such
other parties in reliance on this information. Nor does your use ofthis information constitutes offering of medical advice by the ASE
or create any physician-patient relationship between the ASE and
your patients or anyone else.
REVIEWERS
This document was reviewed by members of the 2024–2025 ASE
Guidelines and Standards Committee, ASE Board of Directors, and
designated reviewer Dr. Andrew Pellett.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The writing committee would like to thank Arshama Dehghan, MS
and Brian Claggett, PhD for their assistance in analyses of reference
limits for diastolic indices by age and sex.Key Points
1. Clinical data, radiographic ﬁndings, and NP levels should be
considered in trying to determine whether there is a cardiac
cause for dyspnea.
2. The next step is a comprehensive echocardiographic examina-
tion that includes the acquisition and measurement of L V GLSand LARS.
3. Before reaching a diagnosis of HFpEF, valvular heart disease,
noncardiac PH, signiﬁcant coronary artery disease, inﬁltrativeand HCM, and pericardial constriction should be excluded.
4. Apply the algorithm for the estimation mean LAP shown in
Figure 3 . If LAP is elevated at rest in symptomatic patients,
HFpEF diagnosis is reached.
5. If LAP at rest is normal in a symptomatic patient, the next step
is diastolic exercise stress echocardiography. If positive, HFpEFdiagnosis is reached. If negative, then noncardiac cause of dys-pnea is present. If the test is inconclusive, then the next stepshould be right heart catheterization.566 Nagueh et al
Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at https://doi.
org/10. 1016/j.echo.2025.03.011 .
REFERENCES
1.Nagueh SF, Smiseth OA, Appleton CP, et al. Recommendations for the
evaluation of left ventricular diastolic function by echocardiography: an up-date from the American Society of Echocardiography and the EuropeanAssociation of Cardiovascular Imaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2016;29:
277-314 .
2.Andersen OS, Smiseth OA, Dokainish H, et al. Estimating left ventricular
ﬁlling pressure by echocardiography. J Am Coll Cardiol 2017;69:
1937-48 .
3.Inoue K, Khan FH, Remme EW, et al. Determinants of left atrial reservoir
and pump strain and use of atrial strain for evaluation of left ventricularﬁlling pressure. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2021;23:61-70 .
4.Shah AM, Claggett B, Kitzman D, et al. Contemporary assessment of left
ventricular diastolic function in older adults: the Atherosclerosis risk inCommunities Study. Circulation 2017;135:426-39 .
5.Paulus WJ, Tsch €ope C, Sanderson JE, et al. How to diagnose diastolic
heart failure: a consensus statement on the diagnosis of heart failure
with normal left ventricular ejection fraction by the heart failure andEchocardiography Associations of the European Society of Cardiology.Eur Heart J 2007;28:2539-50 .
6.Nagueh SF. Cardiac resynchronization therapy and dynamic changes in
right ventricular function. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2018;11:e008195 .
7.Nagueh SF. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: insights into
diagnosis and pathophysiology. Cardiovasc Res 2021;117:999-1014 .
8.Pieske B, Tsch €ope C, de Boer RA, et al. How to diagnose heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction: the HFA-PEFF diagnostic algorithm: aconsensus recommendation from the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of
the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 2019;40:3297-317 .
9.Nagueh SF. Left ventricular diastolic function: understanding pathophys-
iology, diagnosis, and prognosis with echocardiography. JACC Cardio-vasc Imaging 2020;13:228-44 .
10.Nagueh SF, Khan SU. Left atrial strain for assessment of left ventricular
diastolic function: Focus on populations with normal L VEF. JACC Cardi-ovasc Imaging 2023;16:691-707 .
11.Kurt M, Wang J, T orre-Amione G, et al. Left atrial function in diastolic
heart failure. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2009;2:10-5 .
12.Reddy YNV, Obokata M, Egbe A, et al. Left atrial strain and compliance
in the diagnostic evaluation of heart failure with preserved ejection frac-
tion. Eur J Heart Fail 2019;21:891-900 .
13.Kim D, Seo JH, Choi KH, et al. Prognostic implications of left atrial stiff-
ness index in heart failure patients with preserved ejection fraction. JACCCardiovasc Imaging 2023;16:435-45 .
14.Nagueh SF, Chang SM, Nabi F, et al. Cardiac imaging in patients with
heart failure and preserved ejection fraction. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging2017;10:e006547 .
15.Chamsi-Pasha MA, Zhan Y, Debs D, et al. CMR in the evaluation of dia-
stolic dysfunction and phenotyping of HFpEF: current role and futureperspectives. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2020;13:283-96 .
16.Lewandowski D, Yang EY, Nguyen DT, et al. Relation of left ventricular
diastolic function to global ﬁbrosis burden: implications for heart failure
risk stratiﬁcation. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2023;16:783-96 .
17.Nagueh SF, Sun H, Kopelen HA, et al. Hemodynamic determinants of the
mitral annulus diastolic velocities by tissue Doppler. J Am Coll Cardiol
2001;37:278-85 .
18.Opdahl A, Remme EW, Helle-Valle T, et al. Determinants of left ventric-
ular early-diastolic lengthening velocity: independent contributions fromleft ventricular relaxation, restoring forces, and lengthening load. Circula-
tion 2009;119:2578-86 .19.Hasegawa H, Little WC, Ohno M, et al. Diastolic mitral annular velocity
during the development of heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;41:1590-7 .
20.Rivas-Gotz C, Khoury DS, Manolios M, et al. Time interval between
onset of mitral inﬂow and onset of early diastolic velocity by tissueDoppler: a novel index of left ventricular relaxation: experimentalstudies and clinical application. J Am Coll Cardiol 2003;42:1463-70 .
21.Lababidi H, Rahi W, Smiseth OA, et al. New Algorithm for Estimating
Left Ventricular Filling Pressure by Echocardiography. Circulation 2025(in press) .
22.Smiseth OA, Morris DA, Cardim N, et al. Multimodality imaging in pa-
tients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction: an expertconsensus document of the European Association of Cardiovascular Im-aging. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2022;23:e34-61 .
23.
Obokata M, Kane GC, Reddy YN, et al. Role of diastolic stress testing in
the evaluation for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: asimultaneous invasive-echocardiographic study. Circulation 2017;135:825-8 .
24.Ha JW, Lulic F, Bailey KR, et al. Effects of treadmill exercise on mitral
inﬂow and annular velocities in healthy adults. Am J Cardiol 2003;91:114-5 .
25.Burgess MI, Jenkins C, Sharman JE, et al. Diastolic stress echocardiogra-
phy: hemodynamic validation and clinical signiﬁcance of estimation of
ventricular ﬁlling pressure with exercise. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006;47:1891-900 .
26.Ritzema JL, Richards AM, Crozier IG, et al. Serial Doppler echocardiog-
raphy and tissue Doppler imaging in the detection of elevated directlymeasured left atrial pressure in ambulant subjects with chronic heart fail-ure. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2011;4:927-34 .
27.Talreja DR, Nishimura RA, Oh JK. Estimation of left ventricular ﬁlling
pressure with exercise by Doppler echocardiography in patients withnormal systolic function: a simultaneous echocardiographic-cardiac cath-eterization study. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2007;20:477-9 .
28.Y e Z, Miranda WR, Y eung DF, et al. Left atrial strain in evaluation of heart
failure with preserved ejection fraction. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2020;33:1490-9 .
29.Merli E, Ciampi Q, Scali MC, et al. Pulmonary congestion during exercise
stress echocardiography in ischemic and heart failure patients. Circ Car-diovasc Imaging 2022;15:e013558 .
30.Choi EY, Shim CY, Kim SA, et al. Passive leg-raise is helpful to identify
impaired diastolic functional reserve during exercise in patients with
abnormal myocardial relaxation. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2010;23:523-30 .
31.Luong CL, Anand V, Padang R, et al. Prognostic signiﬁcance of elevated
left ventricular ﬁlling pressures with exercise: insights from a cohort of
14,338 patients. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2024;37:382-93 .
32.Jiang R, Y eung DF, Behnami D, et al. A novel continuous left ventricular
diastolic function score using machine learning. J Am Soc Echocardiogr
2022;35:1247-55 .
33.Lee E, Ito S, Miranda WR, et al. Artiﬁcial intelligence-enabled ECG for left
ventricular diastolic function and ﬁlling pressure. NPJ Digit Med 2024;7:4 .
34.Tromp J, Seekings PJ, Hung CL, et al. Automated interpretation of systolic
and diastolic function on the echocardiogram: a multicohort study. Lan-cet Digit Health 2022;4:e46-54 .
35.Akerman AP, Porumb M, Scott CG, et al. Automated echocardiographic
detection of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction using artiﬁcial
intelligence. JACC Adv 2023;2:100452 .
36.Chiou YA, Hung CL, Lin SF. AI-assisted echocardiographic prescreening
of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction on the basis of Intrabeat
dynamics. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2021;14:2091-104 .
37.Carluccio E, Cameli M, Rossi A, et al. Left atrial strain in the assessment of
diastolic function in heart failure: a machine learning approach. Circ Car-
diovasc Imaging 2023;16:e014605 .
38.Pandey A, Kagiyama N, Yanamala N, et al. Deep-learning models for the
echocardiographic assessment of diastolic dysfunction. JACC CardiovascImaging 2021;14:1887-900 .Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7
Nagueh et al 567
39.Chao CJ, Kato N, Scott CG, et al. Unsupervised machine learning for
assessment of left ventricular diastolic function and risk stratiﬁcation. JAm Soc Echocardiogr 2022;35:1214-25 .
40.Nagueh SF, Kopelen HA, Quinones MA. Assessment of left ventricular
ﬁlling pressures by Doppler in the presence of atrial ﬁbrillation. Circula-tion 1996;94:2138-45 .
41.Sohn DW, Song JM, Zo JH, et al. Mitral annulus velocity in the evaluation
of left ventricular diastolic function in atrial ﬁbrillation. J Am Soc Echocar-
diogr 1999;12:927-31 .
42.Khan FH, Zhao D, Ha JW, et al. Evaluation of left ventricular ﬁlling pres-
sure by echocardiography in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation. Echo Res
Pract 2024;11:1 .
43.Nagueh SF, Mikati I, Kopelen HA, et al. Doppler estimation of left ven-
tricular ﬁlling pressure in sinus tachycardia. A new application of tissue
Doppler imaging. Circulation 1998;98:1644-50 .
44.Sohn DW, Kim YJ, Kim HC, et al. Evaluation of left ventricular diastolic
function when mitral E and A waves are completely fused: role of assess-ing mitral annulus velocity. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 1999;12:203-8 .
45.Nagueh SF, Phelan D, Abraham T, et al. Recommendations for multimo-
dality cardiovascular imaging of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyop-athy: an update from the American Society of Echocardiography, incollaboration with the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, the So-
ciety for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and the Society of Cardio-
vascular Computed T omography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2022;35:533-69 .
46.Klein AL, Hatle LK, Burstow DJ, et al. Doppler characterization of left
ventricular diastolic function in cardiac amyloidosis. J Am Coll Cardiol1989;13:1017-26 .
47.Dorbala S, Cuddy S, Falk RH. How to image cardiac amyloidosis: A prac-
tical approach. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2020;13:1368-83 .
48.Appleton CP, Hatle LK, Popp RL. Demonstration of restrictive ventricu-
lar physiology by Doppler echocardiography. J Am Coll Cardiol 1988;11:757-68 .
49.Cohen GI, Pietrolungo JF, Thomas JD, et al. A practical guide to assess-
ment of ventricular diastolic function using Doppler echocardiography.J Am Coll Cardiol 1996;27:1753-60 .
50.Ruan Q, Nagueh SF. Clinical application of tissue Doppler imaging in pa-
tients with idiopathic pulmonary hypertension. Chest 2007;131:395-401 .
51.Inuoe K, Andersen OS, Remme EW, et al. Echocardiographic evaluation
of left ventricular ﬁlling pressure in patients with pulmonary hyperten-
sion. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2024;17:566-7 .
52.Diwan A, McCulloch M, Lawrie GM, et al. Doppler estimation of left
ventricular ﬁlling pressures in patients with mitral valve disease. Circula-
tion 2005;111:3281-9 .
53.Rossi A, Cicoira M, Golia G, et al. Mitral regurgitation and left ventricular
diastolic dysfunction similarly affect mitral and pulmonary vein ﬂowDoppler parameters: the advantage of end-diastolic markers. J Am Soc
Echocardiogr 2001;14:562-8 .
54.Bruch C, Klem I, Breithardt G, et al. Diagnostic usefulness and prog-
nostic implications of the mitral E/E’ ratio in patients with heart fail-
ure and severe secondary mitral regurgitation. Am J Cardiol 2007;
100:860-5 .
55.Abudiab MM, Chebrolu LH, Schutt RC, et al. Doppler echocardiography
for the estimation of L V ﬁlling pressure in patients with mitral annular
calciﬁcation. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2017;10:1411-20 .
56.Estep JD, Vivo RP, Krim SR, et al. Echocardiographic evaluation of hemo-
dynamics in patients with systolic heart failure supported by acontinuous-ﬂow L V AD. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;64:1231-41 .
57.Frea S, Centofanti P, Pidello S, et al. Noninvasive assessment of
hemodynamic status in HeartWare left ventricular assist device patients:validation of an echocardiographic approach. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging
2019;12:1121-31 .
58.Vejpongsa P, Marcos-Abdala HG, Bhimaraj A, et al. Echocardiographic
evaluation of hemodynamics in heart transplant recipients. JACC Cardi-ovasc Imaging 2021;14:313-5 .59.Olson JJ, Costa SP, Y oung CE, et al. Early mitral ﬁlling/diastolic mitral
annular velocity ratio is not a reliable predictor of left ventricular ﬁllingpressure in the setting of severe mitral regurgitation. J Am Soc Echocar-
diogr 2006;19:83-7 .
60.Avenatti E, Little SH, Barker CM, et al. Changes in left atrial function after
Transcutaneous mitral valve repair. Am J Cardiol 2018;122:1204-9 .
61.Zaid RR, Barker CM, Little SH, et al. Pre- and post-operative diastolic
dysfunction in patients with valvular heart disease: diagnosis and thera-
peutic implications. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;62:1922-30 .
62.Ito S, Miranda WR, Nkomo VT, et al. Prognostic risk stratiﬁcation of pa-
tients with moderate aortic stenosis. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2021;34:
248-56 .
63.Klein AL, Ramchand J, Nagueh SF. Aortic stenosis and diastolic dysfunc-
tion: Partners in crime. J Am Coll Cardiol 2020;76:2952-5 .
64.Oh JK, Hatle LK, Sinak LJ, et al. Characteristic Doppler echocardio-
graphic pattern of mitral inﬂow velocity in severe aortic regurgitation. JAm Coll Cardiol 1989;14:1712-7 .
65.Vejpongsa P, T orre-Amione G, Marcos-Abdala HG, et al. Long term
development of diastolic dysfunction and heart failure with preserved
left ventricular ejection fraction in heart transplant recipients. Sci Rep2022;12:34 .
66.Appleton CP. Inﬂuence of incremental changes in heart rate on mitral
ﬂow velocity: assessment in lightly sedated, conscious dogs. J Am Coll
Cardiol 1991;17:227-36 .
67.Appleton CP, Basnight MA, Gonzalez MS. Diastolic mitral regurgitation
with atrioventricular conduction abnormalities: relation of mitral ﬂow ve-
locity to transmitral pressure gradient in conscious dogs. J Am Coll Car-diol 1991;18:843-91 .
68.Xiao HB, Lee CH, Gibson DG. Effect of left bundle branch block on dia-
stolic function in dilated cardiomyopathy. Br Heart J 1991;66:443-7 .
69.Grines CL, Bashore TM, Boudoulas H, et al. Functional abnormalities in
isolated left bundle branch block. The effect of interventricular asyn-chrony. Circulation 1989;79:845-53 .
70.D’Souza KA, Mooney DJ, Russell AE, et al. Abnormal septal motion af-
fects early diastolic velocities at the septal and lateral mitral annulus,and impacts on estimation of the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure.
J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2005;18:445-53 .
71.Rapezzi C, Aimo A, Barison A, et al. Restrictive cardiomyopathy: deﬁni-
tion and diagnosis. Eur Heart J 2022;43:4679-93 .
72.Koyama J, Ray-Sequin PA, Falk RH. Longitudinal myocardial function as-
sessed by tissue velocity, strain, and strain rate tissue Doppler echocardi-
ography in patients with AL (primary) cardiac amyloidosis. Circulation2003;107:2446-52 .
73.Klein AL, Hatle LK, Taliercio CP, et al. Prognostic signiﬁcance of Doppler
measures of diastolic function in cardiac amyloidosis. A Doppler echo-
cardiography study. Circulation 1991;83:808-16 .
74.Phelan D, Collier P, Thavendiranathan P, et al. Relative apical sparing of
longitudinal strain using two-dimensional speckle-tracking echocardiog-
raphy is both sensitive and speciﬁc for the diagnosis of cardiac amyloid-
osis. Heart 2012;98:1442-8 .
75.Liu D, Hu K, Niemann M, et al. Effect of combined systolic and diastolic
functional parameter assessment for differentiation of cardiac amyloid-
osis from other causes of concentric left ventricular hypertrophy. CircCardiovasc Imaging 2013;6:1066-72 .
76.Pagourelias ED, Mirea O, Duchenne J, et al. Echo parameters for differ-
ential diagnosis in cardiac amyloidosis: A head-to-head comparison of
Deformation and Nondeformation parameters. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging2017;10:e005588 .
77.Klein AL, Abbara S, Agler DA, et al. American society of echocardiogra-
phy clinical recommendations for multimodality cardiovascular imaging
of patients with pericardial disease: Endorsed by the society for cardiovas-cular magnetic resonance and society of cardiovascular computed to-
mography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2013;26:965-1012 .
78.Klein AL, Wang TKM, Cremer PC, et al. Pericardial diseases: Interna-
tional position statement on new concepts and advances in multimodal-ity cardiac imaging. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2024;17:937-88 .568 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
79.Choi JH, Choi JO, Ryu DR, et al. Mitral and tricuspid annular velocities in
constrictive pericarditis and restrictive cardiomyopathy: Correlation withpericardial thickness on computed tomography. JACC Cardiovasc Imag-
ing 2011;4:567-75 .
80.Kusunose K, Dahiya A, Popovic ZB, et al. Biventricular mechanics in
constrictive pericarditis comparison with restrictive cardiomyopathyand impact of pericardiectomy. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 2013;6:
399-406 .
81.Welch TD, Ling LH, Espinosa RE, et al. Echocardiographic diagnosis of
constrictive pericarditis: Mayo Clinic criteria. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging
2014;7:526-34 .
82.Qamruddin S, Alkharabsheh SK, Sato K, et al. Differentiating constriction
from restriction (from the Mayo clinic echocardiographic criteria). AmJournal Cardiol 2019;124:932-8 .
83.T emporelli PL, Scapellato F, Corra U, et al. Estimation of pulmonary
wedge pressure by transmitral Doppler in patients with chronic heart fail-ure and atrial ﬁbrillation. Am J Cardiol 1999;83:724-7 .
84.Kusunose K, Yamada H, Nishio S, et al. Clinical utility of single-beat E/e’
obtained by simultaneous recording of ﬂow and tissue Doppler velocities
in atrial ﬁbrillation with preserved systolic function. J Am Coll CardiolImg 2009;2:1147-56 .
85.Wada Y, Murata K, Tanaka T, et al. Simultaneous Doppler tracing of
transmitral inﬂow and mitral annular velocity as an estimate of elevated
left ventricular ﬁlling pressure in patients with atrial ﬁbrillation. Circ J2012;76:675-81 .
86.Goyal P, Almarzooq ZI, Horn EM, et al. Characteristics of hospitaliza-
tions for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Am J Med2016;129:635.e15-e26 .
87.Tsao CW, Lyass A, Enserro D, et al. T emporal trends in the incidence of
and mortality associated with heart failure with preserved and reduced
ejection fraction. JACC Heart Failure 2018;6:678-85 .
88.Owan TE, Hodge DO, Herges RM, et al. Trends in prevalence and
outcome of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J
Med 2006;355:251-9 .
89.Sharma K, Kass DA. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: Mech-
anisms, clinical features, and therapies. Circ Res 2014;115:79-96 .
90.Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA focused
update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heartfailure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American HeartAssociation Task force on clinical practice guidelines and the Heart Fail-
ure Society of America. Circulation 2017;136:e137-61 .
91.Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the
management of heart failure: Executive summary. J Am Coll Cardiol2013;62:1495-539 .
92.Ponikowski P, Voors AA, Anker SD, et al. 2016 ESC Guidelines for the
diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure: the task forcefor the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure of theEuropean Society of Cardiology (ESC) developed with the special contri-
bution of the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of the ESC. Eur Heart J
2016;37:2129-200 .
93.Eriksson H, Caidaul K, Larsson B, et al. Cardiac and pulmonary causes of
dyspnoea—validation of a scoring test for clinical-epidemiological use:
The Study of Men Born in 1913. Eur Heart J 1987;8:1007-14 .
94.Di Bari M, Pozzi C, Cavallini MC, et al. The diagnosis of heart failure in
the community. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;44:1601-8 .95.McKee PA, Castelli WP, McNamara PM, et al. The natural history of
congestive heart failure: The Framingham study. N Engl J Med 1971;285:1441-6 .
96.Pfeffer MA, Shah AM, Borlaug BA. Heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction in perspective. Circ Res 2019;124:1598-617 .
97.L€ofstr€om U, Hage C, Savarese G, et al. Prognostic impact of Framingham
heart failure criteria in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. ESC
Heart Failure 2019;6:830-9 .
98.Reddy YNV, Carter RE, Obokata M, et al. A simple, evidence-based
approach to help guide diagnosis of heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction. Circulation 2018;138:861-70 .
99.Kotecha D, Lam CSP, Van Veldhuisen DJ, et al. Heart failure with pre-
served ejection fraction and atrial ﬁbrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol 2016;
68:2217-28 .
100. Reddy YNV, Obokata M, Gersh BJ, et al. High prevalence of occult heart
failure with preserved ejection fraction among patients with atrial ﬁbrilla-tion and dyspnea. Circulation 2018;137:534-5 .
101. Rahi W, Hussain I, Nguyen DT, et al. Accuracy of clinical evaluation and
chest X-ray for HFpEF diagnosis: comparison against right heart catheter-
ization. Am J Cardiol 2023;206:219-20 .
102. Chow SL, Maisel AS, Anand I, et al. Role of Biomarkers for the Preven-
tion, assessment, and management of heart failure: a scientiﬁc statement
from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2017;135:e1054-91 .
103. Vaishnav J, Chasler JE, Lee YJ, et al. Highest obesity category associated
with largest decrease in N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide in pa-
tients hospitalized with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. J
Am Heart Assoc 2020;9:e015738 .
104. Anjan VY, Loftus TM, Burke MA, et al. Prevalence, clinical phenotype,
and outcomes associated with normal B-type natriuretic peptide levels
in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Am J Cardiol 2012;
110:870-6 .
105. Gonz /C19alez-L /C19opez E, Gallego-Delgado M, Guzzo-Merello G, et al. Wild-
type transthyretin amyloidosis as a cause of heart failure with preserved
ejection fraction. Eur Heart J 2015;36:2585-94 .
106. Mohammed SF, Mirzoyev SA, Edwards WD, et al. Left ventricular amy-
loid deposition in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection frac-
tion. JACC Heart Fail 2014;2:113-22 .
107. Hahn VS, Yanek LR, Vaishnav J, et al. Endomyocardial biopsy character-
ization of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction and prevalence ofcardiac amyloidosis. JACC Heart Fail 2020;8:712-24 .
108. Borlaug BA, Nishimura RA, Sorajja P, et al. Exercise hemodynamics
enhance diagnosis of early heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.Circ Heart Fail 2010;3:588-95 .
109. Simonneau G, Montani D, Celermajer DS, et al. Haemodynamic deﬁni-
tions and updated clinical classiﬁcation of pulmonary hypertension. Eur
Respir J 2019;53:1801913 .
110. Andersen MJ, Olson TP, Melenovsky V, et al. Differential hemodynamic
effects of exercise and volume expansion in people with and without
heart failure. Circ Heart Fail 2015;8:41-8 .
111. Esposito C, Machado P, McDonald ME, et al. Noninvasive evaluation of
cardiac chamber pressures using subharmonic-aided pressure estimation
with deﬁnity microbubbles. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2023;16:224-35 .
112. Duchenne J, Pedrosa J, Van Keer JM, et al. Shear wave elastography using
high-frame-rate imaging in the follow-up of heart transplantation recipi-ents. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2020;13:2304-13 .Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7
Nagueh et al 569
