GUIDELINES AND ST ANDARDS
Recommendations for the Evaluation of Left
Ventricular Diastolic Function by
Echocardiography and for Heart Failure With
Preserved Ejection Fraction Diagnosis: An
Update From the American Society of
Echocardiography
Sherif F. Nagueh, MD, FASE (Chair), Danita Y. Sanborn, MD, FASE (Co-Chair), Jae K. Oh, MD, FASE,
Bonita Anderson, MApplSc, DMU, ACS, FASE, FASA, Kristen Billick, BS, ACS, RCS, RDCS, FASE,
Genevieve Derumeaux, MD, PhD, Allan Klein, MD, FASE, Konstantinos Koulogiannis, MD, FASE,
Carol Mitchell, PhD, ACS, RDMS, RDCS, RVT, RT(R), FASE, Amil Shah, MD, Kavita Sharma, MD,
Otto A. Smiseth, MD, PhD, Honorary FASE, and Teresa S. M. Tsang, MD, FASE, Houston and Dallas, Texas;
Boston, Massachusetts; Rochester, Minnesota; Brisbane, Australia; San Diego, California; Creteil, France; Cleveland,
Ohio; Morristown, New Jersey; Madison, Wisconsin; Baltimore, Maryland; Oslo, Norway; and Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada
Echocardiographic assessment of left ventricular (LV) diastolic function is an integral part of the routine eval-
uation of patients presenting with symptoms of dyspnea or clinical concerns for heart failure. Given the pres-
ence of diastolic dysfunction in many cardiovascular diseases, clinical reports should include comments ondiastolic function and/or left atrial (LA) pressure whenever possible. Since the publication of the 2016 ASE/
EACVI guidelines for assessment of LV diastolic function, new data on additional echocardiographic variables
as left atrial strain and their association with LV ﬁlling pressures have emerged. Moreover, prognostic data
From the Methodist DeBakey Heart and Vascular Center, Houston Methodist
Hospital, Houston, Texas (S.F.N.); Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,Massachusetts (D.Y.S.); the Mayo Clinic, Department of Cardiovascular
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota (J.K.O.); Cardiac Sciences Unit, The Prince
Charles Hospital, Brisbane, QLD, Australia and Faculty of Health, School ofClinical Sciences, Medical Radiation Sciences, Queensland University ofTechnology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia (B.A.); the Scripps Clinic and Scripps La
Jolla Memorial Hospital, La Jolla, California (K.B.); IMRB, Facult /C19e de Sant /C19ed e
Creteil, Creteil, France (G.D.); the Section of Cardiovascular Imaging, Departmentof Cardiovascular Medicine, Heart, Vascular and Thoracic Institute, ClevelandClinic, Cleveland, Ohio (A.K.); the Department of Cardiovascular Medicine
Morristown Medical Center, Gagnon Cardiovascular Institute, Morristown Medical
Center, Morristown, New Jersey (K.K.); Division of Cardiovascular Medicine,Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and PublicHealth, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin (C.M.); the Division
of Cardiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
(A.S.); the Division of Cardiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,Baltimore, Maryland (K.S.); the Institute for Surgical Research, Division of
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Diseases, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet
and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway (O.A.S.); and the Division of Cardiology,University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada (T.S.M.T.).
The following authors reported no actual or potential conﬂicts of interest in relation
to this document: Bonita Anderson, MApplSc, DMU, ACS, FASE, FASA, Genevieve
Derumeaux, MD, PhD, Sherif F. Nagueh, MD, FASE, Danita Y. Sanborn, MD, FASE,Amil M. Shah, MD, MPH, and Teresa S. M. Tsang, MD, FRCPC, FACC, FASE.
The following authors reported relationships with one or more commercial inter-
ests: Kristen Billick, BS, ACS, RCS, RDCS, FASE, is a clinical specialist at Lantheus
Medical Imaging; speaker at Bristol Myers-Squibb; member at Large ASE Board of
Directors, the Cardiovascular Credentialing International Advisory Board, and theCardiovascular Credentialing International Advanced Cardiac Sonographer Exam
Writing Committee; and a Co-Chair ASE Nominations Committee, CCI Advisory
Board, CCI Advanced Cardiac Sonographer (ACS) Exam Writing Committee, Trea-surer for the San Diego Society of Echo. Allan Klein, MD, FASE, is President-Electfor the National Board of Echocardiography; has received research grants from and
is a scientiﬁc advisory board member for Kiniksa; has received research grantsfrom and is a scientiﬁc advisory board member for Cardiol Therapeutics; Research
grant and scientiﬁc advisory board at Ventyx; has served on research grants andthe scientiﬁc advisory board at Pﬁzer; has received book royalties from Wolters
Kluwer, and Elsevier. Konstantinos Koulogiannis, MD, FASE, is a consultant for Ab-
bott and the Edwards Lifesciences Mitral Advisory Board. Carol Mitchell, PhD,ACS, RDMS, RDCS, RVT, RT(R), FASE, is a member of the following professionalsocieties: the American Society of Radiologic Technologists, the American Institute
of Ultrasound in Medicine, the Society for Vascular Ultrasound, and the Society of
Diagnostic Medical Sonography; is an author of textbook chapters for Elsevier; andhas received W. L. Gore & Associates contracted research grants to the Universityof Wisconsin-Madison. Jae K. Oh, MD, FASE, FACC, FAHA, FESC: UpToDate
Section Editor for Pericarditis, Anumana for potential royalty from AI ECG
Diastolic Function Algorithm, REDNVIA for research grant in EVOID AS trial, andMedtronic for consulting in valvular heart disease projects. Kavita Sharma, MD,Department of Cardiovascular Medicine Morristown Medical Center. Otto A. Smi-
seth, MD, PhD, Honorary FASE: co-inventor of ‘‘Method for myocardial segment
work analysis’’, co-inventor of ‘‘ Estimation of blood pressure in the heart’’ and
has received one speaker honorarium from GE Healthcare. Teresa S. M. Tsang,
MD, FRCPC, FACC, FASE: Executive board member of Canadian Society of Echo-
cardiography
Attention ASE Members:
Login at www.ASELearningHub.org to earn CME credit through an online ac-
tivity related to this article. Certiﬁcates are available for immediate accessupon successful completion of the activity and postwork. This activity is free
for ASE Members, and $40 for nonmembers.
Reprint requests: Sherif F. Nagueh, MD, FASE, Methodist DeBakey Heart and
Vascular Center, Houston Methodist Hospital, 6565 Fannin Street, Houston,TX 77030 (E-mail: snagueh@houstonmethodist.org ).
0894-7317/$36.00
Copyright 2025 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the American Society of
Echocardiography.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.echo.2025.03.011
537
from epidemiologic studies have demonstrated the association of echocardiographic measures with the
subsequent development of heart failure. This update provides a contemporary approach for the assessmentof LV diastolic function and the estimation of LA pressure in the general population of patients in sinus rhythm
referred for echocardiographic evaluation, and in special populations that require deviation from the general
approach. The update also discusses the application of echocardiography in the diagnosis of patients withheart failure with preserved LV ejection fraction. (J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2025;38:537-69.)
Keywords: Diastole, Echocardiography, Doppler, Heart failure
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Introduction 538
Clinical and T echnical Considerations 539
2. Invasive Assessment of L V Diastolic Function 539
3. Normal Ranges for Diastolic Measurements 540
4. Reference Ranges Compared With Prognostic Values for Diastolic
Function Measurements 551
5. Age-Independent Indices of Elevated L V Filling Pressures 552
6. L V Structure and LA Volume and Function 552
7. L V Global Longitudinal Strain 552
8. LA Strain 552
9. Other Imaging Modalities for Assessment of LV Diastolic
Function 552
10. Deﬁnition of L V Diastolic Dysfunction Using Echocardiography 552
11. Algorithm for Estimation of Mean LAP at Rest 553
Supplemental Parameters 554
12. Reporting on Diastolic Function 55513. Diastolic Exercise Echocardiography 555
A. Indications 555
B. Performance 555
C. Interpretation 556
14. Application of AI to the Assessment of L V Diastolic Function 55615. Assessment of L V Diastolic Function and Estimation of L V Filling Pres-
sures in Special Populations 556
A. Assessment of L V Diastolic Function in Patients With Valvular HeartDisease 557
B. Heart Transplant Recipients 559
C. Pulmonary Hypertension 560D. AV Block, Bundle Branch Block, and Electronic Pacing 560E. Restrictive Cardiomyopathy 561
F. Pericardial Constriction 561
G. HCM 562H. Atrial Fibrillation 563
16. HFpEF Diagnosis 563
A. Clinical Diagnosis of HFpEF 563
B. Echocardiographic Imaging 565C. Natriuretic Peptides 565
D. Role of HFpEF Prediction Scores 565
E. Alternative Diagnoses 566F. Exercise and Invasive Hemodynamic T esting 566G. Research Needs 566
Notice and Disclaimer 566
Reviewers 566Supplementary Data 567
1. INTRODUCTION
Echocardiographic assessment of
left ventricular (L V) diastolicfunc-tion is an integral part of theAbbreviations
2D= Two-dimensional
AI= Artiﬁcial intelligenceAR= Aortic regurgitation
AS= Aortic stenosis
ASE = American Society of
Echocardiography
AV= Atrioventricular
CMR = Cardiac magnetic
resonance
CRT = Cardiac
resynchronization therapy
CT= Computed tomography
CW = Continuous-wave
EF= Ejection fraction
ESC = European Society of
Cardiology
GLS = Global longitudinal
strain
HCM = Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
HF= Heart failure
HFpEF = Heart failure with
preserved left ventricular
ejection fraction
IVRT = Isovolumic relaxation
time
LA= Left atrial
LAP = Left atrial pressure
LARS = Left atrial reservoir
strain
LAV = LA volume
LAVi = Left atrial volume
index
LBBB = Left bundle branch
block
LV= Left ventricular
LVEDP = Left ventricular
end-diastolic pressure
LVEF = Left ventricular
ejection fractionroutine evaluation ofpatients pre-
senting with symptoms of dys-pnea or clinical concerns forheart failure (HF). Given the pres-
ence of diastolic dysfunction in
many cardiovascular diseases,clinical reports should include
comments on diastolic function
and/or L V ﬁlling pressures when-ever possible. The 2016
American Society of
Echocardiography (ASE) andEuropean Association of
Cardiovascular Imaging guide-
lines for diastolic function assess-ment sought to simplify theclinical approach
1and have
been shown to have good accu-
racy in a large multicenter study.2
Incomplete data, conﬂicting pa-
rameters, and/or uncertainty
about inclusion and exclusioncriteria still result in an unaccept-
ably high frequency of unclassiﬁ-
able or indeterminate caseswhen using the 2016 guidelinesalgorithm. New data on addi-
tional echocardiographic vari-
ables (e.g., left atrial [LA] strain)and their associations with L V
ﬁlling pressures have emerged.
3
Moreover, prognostic data from
epidemiologic studies have
demonstrated the association of
echocardiographic measureswith the subsequent develop-
ment of HF.
4Therefore, this up-
date has two primary goals: (1)to provide a more contemporaryapproach for the assessment of
L V diastolic function and the esti-
mation of L V ﬁlling pressures and(2) to discuss the application of
echocardiography in patients
with HF with preserved L V ejec-tion fraction (HFpEF). As this
guideline serves as an update to538 Nagueh et al
Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
the 2016 diastolic function guide-
line document, it is important tonote that there are several imagesin the original guideline that
show important pathologic or
abnormal echocardiographicﬁndings that are not republished
in this documentbutmay be of in-
terest to readers of this update.The document has three main
sections: one for the general pop-
ulation, a second for speciﬁc pop-ulations that require deviationfrom the general approach, and
a third focused on the diagnosis
of HFpEF. The document alsocontains a summary and recom-
mendations for artiﬁcial intelli-
gence (AI) applications in thisﬁeld.
Clinical and Technical
Considerations
The application of the guidelines
starts with clinical data, including
age, heart rate, underlyingrhythm, blood pressure, two-
dimensional (2D) and Doppler
echocardiographic ﬁndings withrespect to L V volumes and wall
thickness, ejection fraction (EF),
LA volumes, and presence and severity of mitral valve disease. Theguidelines are based on scientiﬁc work concerning diastolic functionand L V ﬁlling pressure in adults studied in ambulatory and acute hospital
caresettings and thusshould not be applied inchildren,normalpregnant
women, or in intraoperative settings. The quality of the 2D, Doppler,and speckle-tracking echocardiographic (STE) signals as well as the lim-
itations for each parameter should be carefully scrutinized. If a signal is
suboptimal, it should not be used in formulating conclusions about L Vdiastolic function. Thepresence of a single measurement thatfalls within
the normal range for a given age group does not necessarily indicate
normal diastolic function and conclusions should not be based on a sin-gle measurement. In an individual patient, consistency among thedifferent indices is of great importance. For the most successful analysis
of diastolic function in any given case, the echocardiographer should
have a solid understanding of the physiologic rationale behind each var-iable, the situations that make any given variable less reliable, the proper
acquisition technique, and the correct analysis of the echocardiographic
variables.2. INVASIVE ASSESSMENT OF LV DIASTOLIC FUNCTION
The invasive assessment of L V diastolic function relies on the estima-
tion of two fundamental parameters, the time constant of L V relaxa-
tion and the chamber stiffness constant. These determine L V pressure
throughout diastole. The time constant of L V relaxation, t, during the
isovolumic relaxation period (isovolumic relaxation time [IVRT]) can
be estimated from high-ﬁdelity solid-state manometry of the left
ventricle. The resulting time-pressure data can then be analyzed to es-timate t(abnormally prolonged >48 ms). The more common ones
include monoexponential decay model to zero asymptote, where
P(t)= Po e
/C0t/t(Supplemental Figure 1 ), or to nonzero asymptote,
where P(t)= Po e/C0t/t+PN, where Pois the L V pressure at peak
/C0dP/dt.5Note that tis load dependent. The sensitivity of L V relaxa-
tion to changes in afterload is most apparent in patients with systolicL V dysfunction. The relation between tand L Vend-systolic pressure is
steeper in patients with systolic dysfunction than in hearts with
normal L V systolic function
6,7
Chamber stiffness affects the rate of L V pressure increase during L V
ﬁlling. Chamber stiffness is most reliably obtained by analyzing L V
end-diastolic volume and L Vend-diastolic pressure (L VEDP) obtained
from conductance catheters from multiple cardiac cycles as ﬁlling isdecreased by gradually inﬂating a balloon in the inferior vena cava.
It is determined primarily by the stiffness properties of the sarcomeres,
the interstitial space, and L V chamber geometry and wall thickness. Itcan be characterized by the L V chamber stiffness constant k.Table 1
presents a summary of invasive measurements that indicate abnormal
L V diastolic function.
5,7,8
The term L V ﬁlling pressures is frequently used but can refer to
several different L V and LA diastolic pressures. These pressures
include mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP), meanMAC = Mitral annular
calciﬁcation
MR = Mitral regurgitation
NP= Natriuretic peptide
PA= Pulmonary artery
PADP = PA diastolic pressure
PASP = Pulmonary artery
systolic pressure
PCWP = Pulmonary capillary
wedge pressure
PR= Pulmonary regurgitation
RAP = Right atrial pressure
RV= Right ventricular
SRIVR= Strain rate during the
isovolumic relaxation period
STE = Speckle-tracking
echocardiographic
TDI = tissue Doppler imaging
TEER = Transcatheter edge-
to-edge repair
TR= Tricuspid regurgitation
TTR = Transthyretin
Key Points
1. The guidelines should not be applied to children, normal preg-
nant women, or the intraoperative setting.
2. The quality of the 2D echocardiographic images, Doppler
waveforms, and STE signals as well as the limitations foreach parameter should be carefully assessed.
3. The echocardiographic indices of diastolic function should al-
ways be interpreted in the context of clinical status and otherechocardiographic parameters.4. The echocardiographer should have a solid understanding of
the physiologic rationale behind each variable, the situations
that make any given variable less reliable, and the technical as-pects of acquisition and analysis of the variables.
Table 1 Invasive measurement values that diagnose LV
diastolic dysfunction and HFpEF5,8
Parameter Value
1. Time constant of LV relaxation ( t), ms >48
2. LV chamber stiffness constant >0.015 *
3. Rest mean PCWP, mm Hg >15
4. Rest LV end-diastolic pressure, mm Hg >16
5. Exercise mean PCWP, mm Hg $25
6. Exercise LV end-diastolic pressure, mm Hg $23
7. PCWP/Cardiac Output slope during supine exercise,
mm Hg/L/min>2
*Value based on the 90th percentile of control group without HFpEF,
where pressure and volume data were obtained by conductance cath-
eter, from Kasner M, Westermann D, Steendijk P, et al. Utility ofDoppler echocardiography and tissue Doppler imaging in the estima-
tion of diastolic function in heart failure with normal ejection fraction: a
comparative Doppler-conductance catheterization study. Circulation.2007;116:637-647.Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7
Nagueh et al 539
LA pressure (LAP), L V pre-A pressure, mean L V diastolic pressure,
and L VEDP1(Figure 1 ). In the early stages of diastolic dysfunction,
L VEDP is the only abnormally elevated pressure, while meanPCWP and LAP remain normal. During tachycardia and/or increased
L V afterload or intravascular volume, mean PCWP and LAP increase,
which is the basis for diastolic stress testing (invasive and noninvasive).Some Doppler variables correlate with an increase in L VEDP,
whereas others reﬂect an increase in mean LAP or its surrogate
(Table 2 ).
Tables 3 and4summarize the technical aspects, hemodynamic
determinants, and clinical utility including advantages and limitationsof each parameter used in the echocardiographic evaluation of L Vdiastolic function.3. NORMAL RANGES FOR DIASTOLIC MEASUREMENTS
Numerous studies have demonstrated the association between age
and echocardiographic measurements of L V diastolic function (a listof these studies is included in the Supplemental Appendix ). Some
studies have further suggested that prognostic thresholds for dia-
stolic measurements may differ by age. The purpose of this sectionis to describe current estimates of normal ranges of diastolic mea-
surements by age, on the basis of the observed range of values
among subjects believed to be free of cardiovascular disease andwithout known risk factors. Importantly, such normal ranges arenot necessarily equivalent to ‘‘optimal’’ values, as the aging process
itself may affect diastolic function. However, the use of age-speciﬁc
normal ranges can enhance clinical interpretation of diastolic indicesand has become standard for echocardiographic measurements of
cardiac structure and function.Key Points
1. L V impaired relaxation is deﬁned as a time constant of L Vrelax-
ation >48 ms.
2. Increased L V chamber stiffness is deﬁned by a chamber stiff-
ness constant >0.015.
3. Invasive criteria for HFpEF, in addition to the time constants of
L V relaxation and L V chamber stiffness, include mean PCWPat rest > 15 mm Hg, L VEDP at rest > 16 mm Hg, and meanPCWP with exercise $25 mm Hg.
4. Doppler measurements that correlate better with mean LAP
or PCWP include mitral E velocity, E/A ratio, and E/e
0ratio.
5. Echocardiographic measurements that correlate better with
L VEDP include mitral A velocity, pulmonary vein Ar velocity,the time difference between Ar duration and that of mitral Aduration (Ar /C0A), and LA pump strain.
6. Throughout this document, the term L V ﬁlling pressure refers to
mean LAP or its correlates (mean PCWP, L V pre-A pressure). Itshould be noted that L VEDP and LAP are not the same, and
although elevated LAP is always associated with elevated
L VEDP in patients with diastolic dysfunction, elevated L VEDPmay be present when LAP is normal.
Figure 1 (Left) LV diastolic pressure recording. Arrows point to LV minimal pressure (min), LV rapid ﬁlling wave (RFW), LV pre-A pres-
sure (pre-A), A-wave rise with atrial contraction, and end-diastolic pressure (EDP). (Middle) LA pressure recording showing ‘‘V’’ and
‘‘A’’ waves marked along with Y and X descent. (Right) Simultaneous LV pressure and LAP recording showing early and late trans-
mitral pressure gradients. Notice that LA ‘‘A-wave’’ pressure precedes the late diastolic rise (LV A wave) in LV pressure.Table 2 Echocardiographic correlates with mean PCWP and
with LVEDP
PCWP, mean LAP, LV pre-A, and
mean LV diastolic pressure
correlates LVEDP correlates
1. Mitral peak E velocity 1. Mitral peak A velocity at tips level
2. Mitral E/A ratio 2. A-wave duration at the annulus
3. Mitral E velocity
deceleration time3. Mitral A velocity (tips level)
deceleration time
4. Mitral E/e0ratio 4. Pulmonary vein peak Ar velocity
5. Pulmonary vein
systolic-to-diastolicvelocity ratio5. Pulmonary vein Ar
duration /C0mitral A duration
6. Peak TR velocity
and PASP6. LA minimum volume
7. End-diastolic velocity
of PR and PADP7. Tissue Doppler–derived mitral
annular a
0velocity
8. LARS 8. LA pump (or contractile) strain540 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
Table 3 Parameters required for the assessment of LV diastolic function via transthoracic echocardiography
Parameter/variable Acquisition Measurements
Primary measurements
Transmitral Inﬂow 1. Apical four-chamber 6color Doppler
imaging to aid optimal alignment.
2. PW Doppler sample volume (1-3 mm) placed
at MV leaﬂet tips.
3. Lower zero baseline and adjust velocity scale
so signal above the zero baseline is as largeas possible.
4. Use low wall ﬁlter setting (100-200 MHz) and
low signal gain.
5. Sweep speed at 100 mm/s.6. Optimal spectral waveforms should display
minimal spectral broadening and not display
spikes or feathering.
7. For A duration, when end of A-wave is not
well deﬁned, sample volume may be lowered
a few millimeters toward the mitral annulus.Peak E-wave velocity (cm/s) : peak early
diastolic modal velocity after ECG T wave
Deceleration time (ms) : time interval from
peak E-wave velocity along the
deceleration slope to the zero baseline
Peak A-wave velocity (cm/s) : peak late
diastolic modal velocity after ECG P wave
E/A ratio : peak E-wave velocity divided by
peak A-wave velocity
± A duration (ms) *: Time interval from the
onset to the offset of the A-wave signal at
zero baseline
TDI at mitral annulus 1. Apical four-chamber with TDI preset
(detection of low velocity, high amplitude
signals).
2. PW sample volume (5-10 mm) at septal and
lateral insertion site of the mitral leaﬂets(larger sample size required to ensure
sampling of annular excursion over systole
and diastole).
3. Angle of interrogation should be as parallel as
much as possible to annular motion.
4. Adjust zero baseline and velocity scale to
display the full spectral signal above andbelow the zero baseline as large as possible.
5. Sweep speed at 100 mm/s.
6. Optimal spectral waveforms should be sharp
and not display signal spikes, feathering orghosting.e0velocity (cm/s) : peak early diastolic
modal velocity after ECG T-wave
a0velocity (cm/s) : peak late diastolic modal
velocity after ECG P-wave
MV E/e0ratio : MV peak E-wave divided by
the TDI e0velocity
Average E/e0: MV peak E-wave divided by
the average of the TDI septal e0and lateral
e0velocities
(Continued )Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 541
LAVi (mL/m2) 1. Apical four- and two-chamber views.
2. Each view optimized for left atrium.
3. Avoid foreshortening by maximizing the
width of the LA base (mitral annulus) and by
maximizing the LA long axis. This typicallyrequires an anterior tilt, demonstrating thepulmonary veins entering the left atrium.
4. Acquire and freeze end-systolic frames (one
or two frames before MV opening).From each view, trace the LA area (excluding
the PVs and LAA) and measure the LAlength from the center of the MV annulus
to the center of the superior LA wall.
Ensure long-axis lengths are within 5 mm of
each other.
LAV (mL) : calculated via the method of disks
or area-length method.
LAVi (mL/m2): LAV divided by BSA.
Peak TR velocity (m/s) 1. Acquired from any view that aligns TR jet
parallel with the ultrasound beam as notedvia the color Doppler images.
2. CW Doppler cursor is aligned parallel to the
TR jet.
3. Adjust zero baseline and velocity scale to
ensure TR signal is displayed as large aspossible.
4. Optimize gain, compression and/or reject to
obtain a complete proﬁle with minimalspectral ‘‘bearding.’’
5. Sweep speed at 50-100 mm/s.Peak TR velocity (m/s) : averaged over the
respiratory cycle
542 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
PV inﬂow 1. Apical four-chamber with color Doppler
imaging at a reduced Nyquist limit to aidoptimal alignment and identiﬁcation of
venous ﬂow (anterior tilt may be required).
2. PW Doppler sample volume (3-5 mm) placed
approximately 5-10 mm into the right upperor right lower PV.
3. Use low wall ﬁlter setting (100-200 MHz) and
low signal gain.
4. Adjust zero baseline and velocity scale to
display the full spectral signal above and
below the zero baseline as large as possible.
5. Sweep speed at 100 mm/s.6. Optimal spectral waveforms should not
display spikes or feathering.
7. Note: High PRF may be required when peak
velocities exceed the Nyquist limit. In thisinstance, be aware of the second sample
volume position (if placed at the mitral valve
level, PV and MV signals will besuperimposed, and
PV S-wave and D-wave measurements will
not be accurate).Peak S-wave velocity (cm/s) : peak systolic
velocity at ECG T wave. When two systolicpeaks (S1 and S2), the peak S2 should be
measured for the S/D ratio
Peak D-wave velocity (cm/s) : peak early
diastolic velocity after ECG T wave
S/D ratio : peak S-wave velocity divided by
peak D-wave velocity
± Peak AR velocity (cm/s) *: peak late
diastolic velocity after ECG P wave
± AR duration (ms) *: Time interval from the
onset to the offset of the AR-wave signal atzero baseline
IVRT (ms) 1. Apical long-axis or ﬁve-chamber view.
2. CW Doppler through LVOT to simultaneously
display the end of aortic ejection and the
onset of transmitral inﬂow.
3. Use low wall ﬁlter setting (100-200 MHz) and
low signal gain.
4. Adjust zero baseline and velocity scale to
display the full spectral signal above andbelow the zero baseline as large as possible.
5. Sweep speed at 100 mm/s.
6. Optimal spectral waveforms should display
AV closing click and clear onset of transmitralinﬂow in early diastoleIVRT (ms) : measured as the time interval
between aortic valve closure and MV
opening.
(Continued )Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 543
LV GLS (%) 1. Optimize the apical four-chamber, two-
chamber, and long-axis of the left ventricle,avoiding foreshortening.
2. Increase 2D gains to increase speckles.3. Narrow image sector and decrease image
depth for optimal frame rate (40-80 frames/s). Ensure sector wide enough to include full
wall thickness and apex and depth to extend
beyond annulus to allow capture of entire leftventricle throughout the cardiac cycle.
4. Region of interest should include 90% of the
myocardium but not the pericardium/epicardium.
5. Conﬁrm good-quality electrocardiogram.
6. Acquire three to ﬁve cardiac cycles for each
view ensuring similar heart rates for eachview.LV GLS (%) : calculated using dedicated LV
strain software to track the LV endocardialwall and to calculate LV GLS. Ensure
correct ECG gating for end-systole based
on aortic valve closure. Conﬁrm trackingand adjust contour and region of interest ifneeded.
Secondary measurements
Valsalva maneuver†1. See above in primary measurements section
for transmitral ﬂow for the proper techniqueof acquiring transmitral inﬂow signals.
2. Patients should be instructed to bear down
against a closed glottis and practice thistechnique before recording.
3. Transmitral inﬂow signal should be
continuously recorded for 10 to 12 s during
the strain phase of the maneuver.
4. Use a slower sweep speed (50 mm/s or
slower) to display the transmitral signal at
rest and during peak strain and/or duringpeak strain and after release.
5. The acquired trace should be annotated to
indicate the use of the Valsalva maneuver.
6. An adequate Valsalva maneuver may be
deﬁned as a >10% reduction in maximal E-wave velocity from baseline.Valsalva positive: E/A ratio < 1 or increase
in A-wave velocity
Valsalva negative : E/A ratio > 1
Color M-mode Vp (cm/s)†1. Apical four-chamber with color Doppler
imaging of transmitral inﬂow (variance modeoff).
2. M-mode cursor placed well aligned with the
path of transmitral inﬂow.
3. Lower the color Nyquist limit by either
decreasing the color velocity scale or by
moving the color baseline upward in the
direction of MV inﬂow to enhance the earlydiastolic slope.Vp (cm/s) : measured from the level of the
mitral annulus to 4 cm into the LV cavityalong the early diastolic slope of ﬁrst
aliased velocity (red-blue interface)
544 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
TE-e0time interval (ms)†See above in the primary measurements section
for transmitral ﬂow for proper technique ofacquisition of transmitral E-wave and TDI e
0
velocities.TE(ms): time interval between the peak R
wave on ECG and the onset of transmitralE-wave velocity
Te0(ms): time interval between the peak R-
wave on ECG and the onset of TDI e0
velocity.
R-R intervals should be matched.
TE-e0(ms):Te0minus T E
Peak PR end-diastolic
velocity (m/s)1. Acquired from any view that aligns PR jet
parallel with the ultrasound beam as noted
via the color Doppler images.
2. CW Doppler cursor is aligned parallel to the
PR jet.
3. Adjust zero baseline and velocity scale to
ensure PR signal is displayed as large aspossible.
4. Optimize gain, compression and/or reject to
obtain a complete proﬁle with minimalspectral ‘‘bearding.’’
5. Sweep speed at 50-100 mm/s.Peak PR end-diastolic velocity (cm/s) :
measured at end-diastole
(Continued )Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 545
Advanced techniques
LA strain (%) 1. See above in the primary measurements
section for LA volumes for the proper
technique for optimizing apical four-chamber
and two-chamber dedicated LA views.
2. Decrease gain and compression to optimize
clean blood pool and LA tissue border,
minimizing artifact.
3. Narrow image sector for optimal frame rate
(50-70 frames/s, preferably on higher end).
4. Conﬁrm good quality ECG with a well-visible
P wave. Use R-R gating method to providereservoir, conduit, and contractile LA strainvalues.
5. Acquire three to ﬁve cardiac cycles for each
view ensuring similar heart rates for eachview.
6. Use dedicated LA strain software to track LA
wall in both apical views (excludingpulmonary veins and LAA).
7. Conﬁrm tracking is on the underside of each
annular point, following the tissue boundary
and extrapolating the fossa ovalis, LAA andPVs to the roof of the left atrium. Minimallyadjust contour if needed.LARS (%) : peak positive strain value during
ventricular systole.
LASct (%) : measured in sinus rhythm as
0 minus strain value at the onset of AC(pre-A wave on ECG), where 0 = strain
value at end-diastole (negative value).
LAScd (%) : 0 minus strain value at AC
(negative value).
Green dots, peak of the strain curve; red dots,
peak strain at onset of AC or at pre-A, S_R,
LARS; S_CT, LASct; S_CD, LAScd.
AC, Atrial contraction; AR, atrial reversal; BSA, body surface area; CD, LA conduit strain; ECG , electrocardiography; LARS =S_R, LA reservoir strain; LAScd =S_CD , LA conduit strain;
LASct =S_CT , LA contractile or pump strain; MV, mitral valve; PV, pulmonary vein; PW, pulsed-wave; Vp, early diastolic ﬂow propagation velocity.
*Additive value when suspected elevated LVEDP and normal LAP (e.g., grade 1 diastolic dysfunction with elevated LVEDP and normal LAP).
†May be attempted when pseudonormalization of the transmitral inﬂow proﬁle is suspected. The Valsalva maneuver may also be performed to identify reve rsible and irreversible grade 3
diastolic dysfunction.546 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
Table 4 Utility, advantages, and limitations of variables used to assess LV diastolic function
Variable Utility and physiologic background Advantages Limitations
Mitral E-wave
velocityReﬂects the LA-to-LV pressure gradient
during early diastole and is affected bychanges in the rate of LV relaxation andLAP.1. Feasible and reproducible.
2. In patients with DCM and reduced
LVEF, mitral velocities correlate betterwith LVFPs, functional class, and
prognosis than LVEF.1. In patients with CAD and patients with
HCM in whom LVEF is >50%,transmitral velocities correlate poorlywith LVFPs.
2. More challenging to apply in patients
with arrhythmias.
3. Preload dependent.
4. Age dependent (decreasing with age).
Mitral A-wave
velocityReﬂects the LA-to-LV pressure gradient
during late diastole (atrial contraction)and is affected by LV compliance and
LA contractile function.Feasible and reproducible. 1. Sinus tachycardia, ﬁrst-degree AV
block and paced rhythm can result infusion of the E and A velocities. If E at
onset of A is >20 cm/s, A velocity may
be higher than if diastole was longer.
2. Not applicable in AF/atrial ﬂutter.
3. Age dependent (increases with aging).
Mitral E/A ratio Along with the DT, this ratio may be used
to identify ﬁlling patterns: normal,impaired relaxation, PN, and restrictive
ﬁlling.1. Feasible and reproducible.
2. Increased ratio usually predicts
elevated LVFP in patients with
myocardial disease but is not useful in
normal subjects.
3. Provides diagnostic and prognostic
information.
4. In patients with DCM, LV ﬁlling pattern
correlates better with LVFPs,functional class, and prognosis than
LVEF.
5. A restrictive ﬁlling pattern in
combination with LA dilation inpatients with normal EFs is associated
with a poor prognosis similar to a
restrictive pattern in DCM.1. Preload-dependent. A normal
transmitral proﬁle may be difﬁcult todifferentiate from a PN transmitral
proﬁle, particularly with normal LVEF,
without additional variables.
2. When E velocity at onset of A is
>20 cm/s, E/A ratio will be reduced
(see above).
3. Not applicable in AF/atrial ﬂutter.4. Age dependent (decreases with
aging).
Mitral DT Inﬂuenced by the rate of decline in LA-LV
pressure gradient after mitral valve
opening, and therefore LV relaxationand LV stiffness.1. Feasible and reproducible.
2. A short DT (<140 ms) in patients with
reduced LVEFs indicates increasedLVEDP with high accuracy both insinus rhythm and in AF.1. Preload-dependent.
2. DT does not relate to LVEDP in normal
LVEFs.
3. Should not be measured with E and A
fusion or E at onset of A >20 cm/s
because of potential inaccuracy.
4. Age dependent (increases with aging).5. Not applicable in atrial ﬂutter.
Mitral A
durationReﬂection of LV compliance in late
diastole.
Shortening occurs when there is reduced
LV compliance resulting in a rise in LV
pressure with atrial contraction, which
abruptly terminates transmitral inﬂow.
Best used in conjunction with pulmonary
venous AR duration (see below).1. In patients with cardiac disease, a
longer A duration for age is usually
associated with normal LVFPs.
2. A shorter A duration (<120 ms) in
patients with cardiac disease
indicates elevated LVFPs.
3. When the ECG PR interval is normal,
termination of the A duration before
the peak ECG QRS complex is a
reliable indicator of elevated LVEDP.1. Cannot be reliably measured or used
when there is E and A fusion, sinus
arrhythmias, second- and third-degree AV block, or a short PR interval
(<120 ms).
Changes to
mitral inﬂow
proﬁle withValsalvamaneuverHelps distinguish normal from PN
transmitral patterns by reducing
preload. A decrease of E/A ratio of$50% or an increase in A-wave
velocity during the maneuver, not
caused by E and A fusion, are highly
speciﬁc for increased LVFPs.When performed adequately under
standardized conditions (keeping
40 mm Hg intrathoracic pressureconstant for 10 s) accuracy indiagnosing increased LVFPs is good.1. Not every patient can perform this
maneuver adequately. The patient
must generate and sustain a sufﬁcientincrease in intrathoracic pressure, andthe sample volume position needs to
be maintained at the mitral leaﬂet tips
during the maneuver.
2. It is difﬁcult to assess if it is not
standardized.
(Continued )Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 547
Table 4 (Continued )
Variable Utility and physiologic background Advantages Limitations
MV L-wave
velocityTriphasic transmitral inﬂow proﬁle with
mid-diastolic ﬂow indicates markedlydelayed LV relaxation in the setting of
elevated LVFPs and reﬂects a
continued LA-LV pressure gradientduring diastasis.
May also be seen on the TDI trace
between the e0and a0velocities.1. When present in patients with known
cardiac disease (e.g., LVH, HCM), it isspeciﬁc for elevated LVFPs. However,
its sensitivity is overall low.
2. Presence in AF may be associated
with increased LVFPs.May rarely be seen with normal LV
diastolic function when the subject hasbradycardia; however, when present,
the velocity is usually <40 cm/s.
TDI e
0velocity e0velocity is an index of LV relaxation.
The hemodynamic determinants of e0
velocity include LV relaxation, restoring
forces and ﬁlling pressure. e0is
decreased across all grades ofdiastolic dysfunction.1. Feasible and reproducible.
2. LVFPs have a minimal effect on e0in
the presence of impaired LV
relaxation.
3. Less load dependent than other
conventional PW Doppler parameters.
4. Helps distinguish PN from normal
transmitral inﬂow proﬁles.1. Limited accuracy in patients with CAD
and regional dysfunction in the
sampled segments, signiﬁcant MAC,
surgical mitral rings or prostheticmitral valves and pericardial disease.
2. Need to sample at least two sites with
precise location and adequate size of
sample volume.
3. Different cutoff values depending on
the sampling site.
4. Age dependent (decreases with
aging).
E/e0ratio e0velocity can be used to correct for the
effect increased preload on the
transmitral E velocity, E/e0ratio can be
used to predict increased LVFPs.1. Feasible and reproducible.
2. Values for average E/e0ratio < 8
usually indicate normal LVFPs, values>14 have high speciﬁcity for increasedLVFPs.1. Not accurate in patients with heavy
MAC, or prosthetic MV and pericardial
disease.
2. ‘‘Gray zone’’ of values (E/e0between 8
and 14) in which LVFPs are
indeterminate.
3. Accuracy is reduced in patients with
CAD and regional dysfunction at the
sampled segments.
4. Different cutoff values depending on
the sampling site.
LAVi LA volume reﬂects the cumulative effects
of increased LVFPs over time. It is
directly but weakly related to LVFP.Increased LA volume is an independentpredictor of death, HF, AF, and
ischemic stroke.1. Feasible and reproducible.
2. Provides diagnostic and prognostic
information about LV diastolicdysfunction and chronicity of disease.
3. Apical 4-chamber view provides visual
estimate of LA and RA size which
conﬁrms LA is enlarged.
4. A normal LA size suggests normal
LVFPs.1. LA dilatation, in the absence of
diastolic dysfunction, may be seen in
patients with high-output states, hearttransplants with biatrial technique,atrial ﬂutter/ﬁbrillation, signiﬁcant MV
disease, and in well-trained athletes.
2. Suboptimal image quality, including
LA foreshortening, in technically
challenging studies precludes
accurate tracings.
3. It can be difﬁcult to measure LA
volumes in patients with ascending
and descending aortic aneurysms and
large interatrial septal aneurysms.
TR velocity Can be used to estimate the PASP in the
absence of PS or RVOT obstruction
(RVSP = PASP). A signiﬁcant correlationexists between PASP and noninvasivelyderived LAP in group II PH. In the
absence of pulmonary disease,
increased PASP suggests elevated LAP.1. PASP is passively elevated when the
LAP is increased due to left heart PH;
thus, an elevated PASP infers anelevated LAP.
2. Increased PASP indicates PH which
has prognostic implications.1. Indirect estimate of LAP.
2. Adequate recording of a full envelope
is not always possible, though
intravenous agitated saline or UEAsincrease yield.
3. Accuracy of calculation of PASP is
dependent on the reliable estimation
of RAP.
4. With very severe TR and a low systolic
RV-RA pressure gradient, PASP
cannot be accurately estimated.
5. RVSP does not equal PASP when
there is PS or RVOT obstruction.
(Continued )548 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
Table 4 (Continued )
Variable Utility and physiologic background Advantages Limitations
PR end-
diastolicvelocityCan be used to estimate the PAEDP when
TR velocity cannot be accuratelymeasured. A signiﬁcant correlation
exists between PAEDP and invasively,
as well as noninvasively, derivedPCWP. In the absence of pulmonarydisease, the PAEDP approximates the
PCWP.1. PAEDP is closely related to PCWP.
2. Increased PAEDP indicates PH which
has prognostic implications.1. Adequate recording of a full PR jet
envelope is not always possiblethough UEAs increases yield.
2. Accuracy of calculation of PAEDP is
dependent on the reliable estimationof RAP.
3. PAEDP overestimates PCWP by
>5 mm Hg when there is increased
PVR.
Pulmonary
veins: S
velocity, Dvelocity andS/D ratioS-wave velocity (sum of S1 and S2) is
inﬂuenced by LAP, LA contractility and
relaxation, LA stiffness, and LV and RVcontractility. D-wave velocity isinﬂuenced by changes in LAP in early
diastole and LV relaxation and it
changes in parallel with the transmitralE-wave velocity. AR velocity isdetermined by LA contractility and LV
compliance.
Decrease in LV compliance and increase
in LAP is associated with decrease in S
velocity, increase in D velocity, and an
increase in AR velocity and a longer ARduration. The S/D is inversely related toLAP.1. Reduced S velocity, an S/D ratio <1
and systolic ﬁlling fraction (systolic
VTI/total forward ﬂow VTI) < 40%indicate increased LAP in patients withreduced LVEFs.
2. In patients with AF, DT of the D-
velocity can be used to estimate meanPCWP.
3. AR velocity > 35 cm/s indicates an
increased LVEDP.1. Feasibility of recording PV inﬂow can
be suboptimal, particularly in ICU
patients.
2. The relationship between PV systolic
ﬁlling fraction and LAP has limited
accuracy in patients with normal EF,
AF, MV disease, and HCM.
3. AR velocity is absent in patients
with AF.
Ar-A duration The time difference between durations of
PV ﬂow and transmitral inﬂow duringatrial contraction is associated with the
LVEDP. The longer the time difference,
the higher LVEDP.1. AR duration > mitral A duration by 30
ms indicates an increased LVEDP.
2. Independent of age and EF.
3. Accurate in patients with MR and
patients with HCM.1. Adequate recordings of AR duration
may not be feasible in many patients(comparing the end of AR and
transmitral A signals to the ECG QRS
may be helpful in identifying ashortening of the transmitral Aduration).
2. Not applicable in patients with atrial
arrhythmias, sinus tachycardia orheart block.
3. Transmitral A duration cannot be
reliably measured in certain cases (see
above).
IVRT Reﬂects the time interval aortic valve
closure and MV opening and the
crossover between LA and LVpressures.
Duration is directly related to LV
relaxation and inversely related to LAP
(i.e., prolonged in patients withimpaired LV relaxation and normalLVFPs, shortened with increased LAP).1. Overall feasible and reproducible.
2. IVRT can be combined with other
transmitral inﬂow parameters such asE/A ratio to estimate LVFPs in patientswith HFrEF.
3. Helpful in identifying elevated LVFPs in
patients with MAC.
4. When IVRT markedly prolonged (>110
ms), LAP likely normal.
5. A short IVRT (<70 ms) has a high
speciﬁcity for elevated LAP in patientswith cardiac disease.
6. In patients with MS or MR, IVRT can be
combined with T
E-e0to estimate
LVFPs.1. Limited use in isolation
2. Age-dependent (shorter in young
patients with rapid LV ﬁlling andlengthens as relaxation slows withage)
3. Preload-dependent (normalizes with
increasing LAP)
4. IVRT is in part affected by heart rate
and arterial pressure.
5. More challenging to measure and
interpret with tachycardia.
6. Identiﬁcation of the onset of MV
opening can be challenging.
(Continued )Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7
Nagueh et al 549
Table 4 (Continued )
Variable Utility and physiologic background Advantages Limitations
LV GLS Measure of LV systolic function. Impaired
LV GLS is common in some patientswith HFpEF indicating subclinical LV
dysfunction.1. A more sensitive index of myocardial
systolic performance than EF.
2. Provides earlier detection of
myocardial disease in the setting of a
normal EF.
3. Can be more reproducible than EF.4. May be a superior discriminator of
outcomes in patients with HFrEF and
HFpEF.1. Requires dedicated software package
which is not available in all institutions.
2. Suboptimal image quality in
technically challenging studies
precludes accurate measurements.
3. Load-dependent.4. Values may vary between vendors;
hence, results may not be
interchangeable.
Color M-mode
Vp: Vp, and
E/Vp ratioVp indirectly related to the time constant
of LV relaxation ( t); (the longer it takes
for the LV to relax, the slower the Vp).Vp can be used to correct for the effectincreased preload on the transmitral E
velocity, E/Vp ratio is directly related to
the LAP.1. Relatively load-independent.
2. Vp is reliable as an index of LV
relaxation in patients with depressedLVEFs and dilated LV but not inpatients with normal EFs.
3. Helps distinguish PN from normal
transmitral inﬂow proﬁles.
4. The ratio of the transmitral E to Vp (E/
Vp)$2.5 predicts PCWP >15 mm Hg
with reasonable accuracy in patients
with depressed EFs.1. In patients with normal LV volumes
and EF but elevated LVFPs, Vp can be
misleadingly normal.
2. Vp pseudonormalization may also be
seen in patients with small,
hypertrophied ventricles.
3. Lower feasibility and reproducibility.4. Suboptimal alignment between M-
mode cursor and transmitral inﬂow
results in erroneous measurements.
TE-e0time
intervalCan identify patients with diastolic
dysfunction due to delayed onset of e0
velocity compared with onset of the
transmitral E velocity.1. Helps distinguish PN from normal
transmitral inﬂow proﬁles.
2. Ratio of IVRT to T E-e0(IVRT/T E-e0) can
be used to estimate LVFPs in normalsubjects and patients with MV
disease.
3. Can be used to differentiate patients
with restrictive cardiomyopathy who
have a prolonged time interval from
those with pericardial constriction inwhom it is not usually prolonged.1. Non-simultaneous measurements
(important to match R-R intervals).
2. More challenging to acquire
satisfactory signals with closeattention needed to sampling location,
gain, and ﬁlter settings.
3. Time intervals are numerically quite
small so any error in measurement
may prove signiﬁcant.
LAS LAS in diastolic function primarily
focused on LARS. LARS shows a direct
correlation with the degree of diastolicdysfunction (LARS worsens as thedegree of diastolic dysfunction
worsens) and is inversely related to
LVFP (the lower the LARS, the higherthe LVFP).
As a late diastolic parameter, LASct
(pump strain) is inversely related toLVEDP (the less negative the LASct,the higher the LVEDP).1. LARS provides an estimate of LVFPs
in patients with reduced EF.
2. LARS may be helpful in distinguishing
between degrees of diastolicdysfunction.
3. LARS may be used as a substitute for
missing standard variables.
4. LARS provides prognostic value in
patients with HF, AF, ischemic heart
disease, and valvular heart disease.
5. LA dysfunction identiﬁed with LARS
may show abnormalities before
anatomic changes occur.1. Requires dedicated LAS software
package which is not available in all
institutions.
2. Suboptimal image quality in
technically challenging studies
precludes accurate measurements.
3. Values are age dependent (LARS
decreases with age).
4. LARS dependent on LV systolic
function (may be normal despiteelevated LVFP in patients with normalEF with preserved LV GLS).
5. R-R gating may be an inaccurate
substitution for end-diastole (e.g.,when there is a BBB).
6. May be inaccurate when there is a
mobile atrial septum or a thin-walled
LA or when tracking does not followthe mitral annulus or follows speckles
outside of the imaging plane.
7. LARS should not be used to assess
LVFP in patients with AF, signiﬁcantMR, heart transplant recipients,
patients with normal EF and
GLS > 18%, or suspected LAstunning.
AF, Atrial ﬁbrillation; AR, atrial reversal velocity in pulmonary veins; BBB , bundle branch block; CAD , coronary artery disease; DCM , dilated cardio-
myopathy; E@A , mitral velocity at the start of atrial contraction; HFrEF , HF with reduced EF; ICU, intensive care unit; LARS , LA reservoir strain; LAS,
LA strain; LASct , LA contractile strain; LVFP , LV ﬁlling pressure; Mitral DT , E-wave deceleration time; MV, mitral valve; PAEDP , PA end-diastolic pres-
sure; PH, pulmonary HTN; PN, pseudonormal; PS, pulmonary stenosis; PV, pulmonary vein; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; RA, right atrial;
ROI, region of interest; RVOT , RV outﬂow tract; RVSP , RV systolic pressure; UEA, ultrasound enhancing agent; Vp, early diastolic ﬂow propagation
velocity; VTI, velocity time integral.550 Nagueh et al Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
July 2025
Summary-level data were extracted from publications of several
population-based studies reporting the distribution of diastolicfunction measurements among subjects known to be free ofcardiovascular diseases within speciﬁed age ranges and, when
available, stratiﬁed by sex. These studies generally excluded indi-
viduals with known cardiovascular disease (e.g., coronary arterydisease, atrial ﬁbrillation, HF) or cardiovascular risk factors (e.g.,
hypertension, diabetes, obesity, renal dysfunction). Not all mea-
surements were available in all studies. Using summary data onvalues by age group, we identiﬁed the normal ranges for diastolic
measurements on the basis of their ﬁfth and 95th percentile limits.
Details of the data extraction, harmonization, and statistical anal-ysis used to derive these limits are provided in the Supplemental
Appendix . A list of studies used for data extraction is provided
inSupplemental Table 2 .
Supplemental Figures 5 to 16 display the resulting estimated ﬁfth
and 95th percentile limits of diastolic measurements by age and
sex, while Table 5 provides the estimated normal ranges for each dia-
stolic measurement by decade of life. Expanded data are provided intheSupplemental Appendix .Supplemental Table 3 provides ﬁfth and
95th percentile reference limits for each diastolic measurement by
age decade. Supplemental Figures 17 to 32 provide additional plots
of the ﬁfth and 95th percentile limits of each diastolic measure by
age, including 95% CIs and the associated scatterplot of the source
data.
Differences in normal ranges by age were observed for measure-
ments on the basis of transmitral ﬂow velocities (E velocity, A veloc-
ity, E/A ratio), tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) early diastolic velocity
(e
0), E/e0ratio, tricuspid regurgitation (TR) peak velocity, and LA vol-
ume (maximum LA volume index [LAVi]) and function (LA reser-
voir strain [LARS]; P< .001 for all). Statistical differences in ﬁfth
and 95th percentile limits were observed by sex for E and Avelocities but not for E/A ratio or the other measurements assessed.
For LAVi, differences were also observed by method of measure-ment: biplane method of disks vs area-length method(Supplemental Figures 27 and 28 ). For LARS, differences were
noted on the basis of the speckle-tracking strain software vendor
used ( Supplemental Figures 31 and 32 ).
4. REFERENCE RANGES COMPARED WITH PROGNOSTIC
VALUES FOR DIASTOLIC FUNCTION MEASUREMENTS
The values provided in this section are based on an estimate of
the most extreme 10% of values from individuals of varying
ages free of known cardiovascular disease or traditional risk fac-
tors. It is important to recognize that prognostically relevant alter-ations in diastolic measurements can occur within the range ofnormal values deﬁned in this way. Among >5,700 older adults
(>65 years of age) in the ARIC (Atherosclerosis Risk in
Communities) study, increases in the incidence of HF or deathwere observed at values of septal e
0velocity < 6 cm/s (lower
10th percentile limit 4.6 cm/s) and lateral e0velocity < 7 cm/s
(lower 10th percentile limit 5.2 cm/s). Additionally, in this studyE/e
0ratio and LAVi demonstrated monotonic and near linear as-
sociations with incidence of HF or death, without evidence of a
clear threshold with respect to prognosis. Additional studieswith greater power and inclusion of individuals of broader agerange will be necessary to determine if similar patterns are seen
in younger individuals, and to reﬁne estimates of prognostically
relevant thresholds for diastolic measurements. As noted above,these data also do not address ‘‘optimal’’ values for these diastolic
measurements, which may be obscured by their population-level
age-related changes.Table 5 Normal reference ranges for diastolic measurements by age category
Diastolic measureAge, y
20-39 40-60 60-80
E wave, m/s 0.54 (0.52-0.57) to 1.11 (1.07-1.16) 0.47 (0.46-0.49) to 1.02 (0.99-1.05) 0.39 (0.37-0.42) to 0.92 (0.88-0.96)
A wave, m/s 0.24 (0.21-0.27) to 0.68 (0.63-0.72) 0.33 (0.32-0.35) to 0.82 (0.80-0.84) 0.43 (0.40-0.45) to 0.97 (0.93-1.00)E/A ratio 0.88 (0.82-0.94) to 2.73 (2.66-2.81) 0.69 (0.66-0.73) to 2.07 (2.03-2.11) 0.50 (0.45-0.56) to 1.40 (1.34-1.47)
e
0lateral (cm/s) 9.9 (9.4-10.4) to 22.1 (21.5-22.8) 7.5 (7.3-7.8) to 17.5 (17.1-17.9) 5.2 (4.8-5.6) to 13.0 (12.4-13.5)
e0septal (cm/s) 7.2 (6.8-7.7) to 16.4 (16.0-16.9) 5.7 (5.4-5.9) to 13.5 (13.2-13.8) 4.1 (3.7-4.5) to 10.6 (10.1-11.0)
e0average (cm/s) 8.7 (8.2-9.2) to 19.1 (18.6-19.7) 6.7 (6.4-7.0) to 15.4 (15.1-15.7) 4.7 (4.3-5.1) to 11.7 (11.2-12.2)
E/e0lateral 2.5 (2.0-3.0) to 6.3 (5.3-7.2) 3.6 (3.4-3.9) to 9.4 (8.9-10.0) 4.8 (4.5-5.0) to 12.6 (12.0-13.2)
E/e0septal 4.0 (3.3-4.7) to 9.1 (8.2-9.9) 4.9 (4.6-5.3) to 12.1 (11.7-12.6) 5.9 (5.5-6.3) to 15.2 (14.7-15.7)
E/e0average 4.0 (3.8-4.3) to 9.1 (8.5-9.7) 4.6 (4.4-4.8) to 11.5 (11.2-11.9) 5.2 (4.9-5.4) to 14.0 (13.4-14.5)
LAVi, mL/m212.1 (10.9-13.2) to 39.4 (34.6-44.2) 12.9 (12.2-13.5) to 38.3 (35.4-41.1) 13.7 (12.7-14.6) to 37.1 (33.0-41.3)
LAVi, Simpson, mL/m212.5 (12.0-13.0) to 41.9 (38.1-45.6) 13.3 (13.0-13.6) to 41.0 (38.5-43.4) 14.2 (13.7-14.6) to 40.0 (36.5-43.6)
LAVi, A-L, mL/m28.9 (3.9-13.9) to 20.9 (12.9-28.8) 11.0 (8.9-13.0) to 27.1 (24.0-30.3) 13.0 (9.9-16.0) to 33.4 (28.6-38.2)
TR velocity, m/s 1.3 (1.1-1.5) to 2.7 (2.6-2.7) 1.5 (1.4-1.6) to 2.7 (2.7-2.7) 1.7 (1.5-1.8) to 2.8 (2.7-2.8)LA strain, % 29.5 (27.6-31.3) to 63.2 (59.9-66.5) 26.8 (25.6-28.0) to 57.7 (55.6-59.9) 24.1 (22.2-26.0) to 52.3 (48.9-55.7)
LAS, TomTec, % 29.9 (27.0-32.9) to 60.5 (57.6-63.4) 27.5 (25.7-29.4) to 55.4 (53.6-57.2) 25.1 (22.6-27.6) to 50.3 (47.9-52.7)
LAS, EchoPAC, % 29.5 (27.9-31.1) to 64.9 (59.7-70.2) 25.3 (24.0-26.5) to 61.5 (57.4-65.6) 21.1 (18.7-23.4) to 58.1 (50.3-65.8)
Reference values are based of ﬁfth and 95th percentile values derived from regression equations to ﬁt summary data from persons free of cardio-
vascular disease or risk factors (see Supplemental Appendix ). Values displayed are: ﬁfth percentile limit (95% conﬁdence limits) to 95th percentile
limit (95% conﬁdence limit).Journal of the American Society of Echocardiography
Volume 38 Number 7Nagueh et al 551
